
INDIA 



Art and Culture 

1300-1900 



Stuart Cary Welch 



The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York 






I. THE 




GREAT TRADITION 




THE GREAT TRADITION 



TRIBE AND VILLAGE 



India: Art and Culture 1300-1900 documents six critical cen- 
turies of artistic synthesis, change, and survival. The exhi- 
bition opens with two South Indian bronzes that exemplify 
the endurance and vitality of the all-encompassing Great 
Tradition: stirring images of the Hindu god Shiva and his 
consort Parvati, sculpted by anonymous craftsmen who 
used age-old techniques and prescribed canons of iconog- 
raphy and proportion to give shape to a sacred inner 
vision. It closes with two photographs that epitomize adapt- 
ability in the face of profound disruption: an enigmatic 
portrait of a sensitive young prince and a brooding study 
of swagged Victorian curtains leading only to a forbid- 
dingly blank wall. Both photographs were taken in about 
1890 by Lala Din Dayal, virtuoso of a new-fledged Western 
technique. Bracketed by these extremes of the traditional 
and the nontraditional are hundreds of pictures and ob- 
jects, each of which, from a miniature commissioned by an 
emperor to a wood carving created by a village artisan, is a 
work to be judged in its own right. Spanning all parts of 
the subcontinent, the exhibition demonstrates not only the 
many paths artistic creativity has taken in India but the 
fundamental familiality of Indian art and the profound spir- 
ituality that is its essence. If a drably colored folk bronze 
surprises with its soaring spirit, some shimmeringly rich 
ornament might prove equally, or even more, transcendental. 

The dominant characteristic of traditional Indian art 
and culture is its spirituality. From birth to death, life is 
keyed to shrine, temple, or mosque, enriched by prayer, 
chanting, and spiritual exercises, and enlivened by rites of 
passage and religious festivals. Artists and craftsmen reared 
in a spiritual milieu instill their work with its essences, and 
many patrons in India, regardless of their specific religion, 
encouraged this tendency. Most of the works of art brought 



together here either portray gods and goddesses, were used 
as aids to meditation or worship, or were intended to re- 
mind beholders of their sacred obligations. Even portrai- 
ture emerged from depictions of donors on shrines. Though 
the religious connection is not immediately apparent, even 
ragamala (garland of melody) series of miniature paintings 
represent a synesthetic merging of poetry, music, and paint- 
ing that developed from Hindu temple practice, in which 
architecture, painting, sculpture, and literature, as well as 
music, dance, and costume, were combined to honor the 
deities. Spirituality is not always associated with formal 
religion: one often senses it in objects as outwardly worldly 
as Mughal jade carvings or as mundane as quilts and water 
vessels. 

These objects offer more than aesthetic delight, and 
they are more than reflections of a remarkable cultural 
ethos. Rather, they are highly charged sources of spiritual 
energy and potent, almost animate ambassadors from a 
land that can be envisioned as a noble mountain inhabited 
by a hierarchical but interdependent and infinitely varied 
society, a cultural, linguistic, and ethnic blend that began at 
least as long ago as three and a half millennia, when Aryan 
tribes from Central Asia invaded India and found what we 
now know was an already highly developed civilization. 

At the airy summit of the mountain, peopled by the 
worldly (and at times the otherworldly), the pace is swift 
and dangerous, fraught with temptation and prone to vio- 
lence. Alive, radiant as a peacock's tail, rich with gold and 
emeralds, the pinnacle is alluring and curiously welcoming, 
but it is no place for permanent shelter. Nearer the less 
brilliantly hued base, the mountain gains in solidity and 
earthiness. Life moves more slowly, with less stimulating 
variation, but the footholds are more secure and compan- 



< Overleaf, 19, detail 



ionship is plentiful. This exhibition offers works of art 
from all levels of the mountain, from the villages and re- 
mote tribal areas that form its solid base to the courts and 
palaces perched more precariously near the top. 

The bounty of the Indian subcontinent, a triangular 
peninsula 2,000 miles long suspended beneath the vast Cen- 
tral Asian land mass, has since ancient times attracted horde 
after horde of immigrants and ambitious seekers of em- 
pire. The Bay of Bengal forms India's eastern border; the 
Arabian Sea lies to the west, the Indian Ocean to the south. 
Across the top of the wedge-shaped peninsula, 1,600 miles 
of mountain ranges — the Hindu Kush, Karakoram, and 
Himalaya — barricade India from the rest of Asia. Migrants 
from Turkistan and the Central Asian steppes began to 
scramble through the Khyber and Bolan passes in India's 
northwest corner during the second millennium B.C. and 
continued to pour in until as late as the seventeenth century. 

After struggling through the hazardous mountain 
passes, each family, tribe, or army usually faced another 
epic test in "the cockpit of India," the narrow corridor 
between the Indus and Ganges river basins: angry settlers 
determined to protect the lands they had in turn wrested 
from earlier arrivals. But in India the bitter and the sweet 
often blossom from a single stem. Within the seductive 
walled paradise, as hard to leave as it is to enter, a culture of 
cultures was nurtured, ever gaining in intensity and savor 
over the centuries as wave upon wave of ethnically and 
linguistically varied people eventually laid down their arms, 
settled, and were assimilated. 

Geography and climate contribute to the form and 
substance of culture and art. In the north of the Indian 
subcontinent rise the world's highest peaks, and below them 
stretch some of the most luxuriant valleys and arid deserts, 
flattest plains and densest jungles. The monsoon winds 
contribute to the pattern of extremes, scorching the land 
for part of the year, then from June to October bringing 
essential, cooling rains up from the south that wash the 
mountainsides, crumbling the rich loam the holy Ganges 
River carries to one of the world's lushest plains. But the 
monsoon is capricious, sometimes bringing floods with an 
excess of bounty, sometimes withholding its liquid bless- 
ing for so long that parts of the fertile paradise become 
hells of drought and famine. It is not surprising that in the 
ancient religions of India such erratic behavior was attrib- 
uted to deities who personified the forces and spirits of 
nature. When the gods smiled, the monsoon was good; if 
their wrath was not appeased, it brought floods or drought. 

In the face of such extremes, it is also not surprising 
that the flavors of Indian art are so pronounced — even her 
classicism is excessive in its restraint — or that Indians devel- 
oped the metaphysical concepts of maya and karma. Hin- 
dus see the physical world as a form of maya, or illusion, 
from which man's greatest hope is to escape and to become 
one with the Supreme Soul, the only true reality, beyond 
which nothing exists. Only through liberation from the 
continuous cycle of creation and destruction can man tran- 
scend karma, the inevitable consequences of his every ac- 
tion, either in this life or in the ones that follow. 

The ancient Aryans were probably the last of the in- 
vaders and immigrants of the early period whose ways 
were not gradually absorbed, or Indianized, entirely beyond 
recognition. The Vedas (literally, knowledge), the four sa- 



cred books of the Aryans, written in Sanskrit, are funda- 
mental to Indian thought and are still revered by Hindus. 
The earliest of the Vedas, the Rig Veda, which was proba- 
bly compiled sometime between 1500 and 1000 B.C., con- 
tains the oldest hymns in the world, songs of praise to 
Indra, Lord of the Heavens, and to other Aryan gods. The 
Vedas are also a rich source of historical information, if 
one allows for their bias. 

The Vedic texts describe the Aryans' attacks on the 
fortified towns of dark-skinned, "broad-nosed, and bull- 
lipped" barbarians, hostile cattle breeders who were terrified 
by the unfamiliar horse-drawn chariots of the militant and 
efficiently organized conquerors. In the nineteenth century, 
however, archeologists uncovered evidence at the pre- 
Aryan sites of Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa in the Indus 
Valley that presents quite a different view, implying that in 
fact the Aryans were the barbarians and their victims were 
peaceful, prosperous people who lived in highly organized 
communities with wide streets and advanced drainage sys- 
tems and were in contact with nations in western and Central 
Asia. Among the many objects excavated at Mohenjo- 
Daro are a dancing girl or goddess cast in bronze and a 
steatite bust of a bearded man, which could be a royal 
portrait, that date to the late third or early second millen- 
nium B.C. They rank among the masterpieces of Indian art. 

Scholars speculate that the "original Indians" encoun- 
tered by the first raiders were Australoids, akin to the peo- 
ple of Australia, New Guinea, and parts of the East Indies. 
Following the Aryan invasions, these people were either 
killed, enslaved, blended into the community by intermar- 
riage, or driven off, usually to less luxuriant regions. De- 
scendants of the so-called Dravidians can be found in remote 
tracts of the subcontinent among India's tribal people, whose 
traditional lore often refers to their times of greatness and 
whose lively and timeless arts are represented here in the 
section called Tribe and Village. Of similar lineage are the 
Dravidians of South India, whose lives were not inter- 
rupted by invasions. Examples of their cultural heritage are 
included in the Great Tradition section. 

Although some elements of the caste system may have 
existed before they came, the Aryans are usually credited 
with this specifically Indian concept, which has become less 
influential in modern times. By about 900 to 600 B.C., when 
the three later Vedas were compiled, Aryan society was led 
by priests whose complex rituals had become accepted as 
indispensable to tribal prosperity. Aryan priests divided 
humankind into four still familiar major social classes, each 
further subdivided into many castes and subcastes. The 
scholars and priests who devised and perpetuated the sys- 
tem constituted the highest class, the Brahmins. Warriors 
and rulers made up the second, the Kshatriyas. The third 
class, the Vaishyas, was composed of farmers and mer- 
chants, and the laborers and serfs who worked the land 
were the fourth class, the Shudras. The English word caste 
comes from casta, Portuguese for lineage. The Aryans used 
the Sanskrit word varna, which means color. The darker, 
"uncivilized" aboriginals whom the fair-skinned Aryans 
had defeated were relegated to a fifth group, the Panchama, 
outside the caste system. 

Despite its diversity, Indian culture is composed of 
interlocking cells. In India each separate part of the whole, 
each element of life, each idea or thing, is relegated to its 



own niche, either in the phenomenal world or in the realm 
of soul and mind. However rigid the order might seem, 
much of its strength lies in its flexibility. Within the caste 
system, for instance, new categories have evolved for those 
who do not fit into earlier schemes: outlaws, foreigners, 
practitioners of new occupations, even transvestites. Further- 
more, each segment of the community is linked to and 
often depends on the others, and the hierarchy is in con- 
stant flux, varying not only in time but in space and in the 
mind. Many tribal people, heedless of the caste system, see 
themselves as the mighty rulers of their domains. And 
however deep India's divisions along religious lines, Muslim 
prime ministers were often employed at Hindu courts, and 
Hindu officials at Muslim courts. Hindu painters worked 
for Muslim patrons, and Muslim artists painted Hindu sub- 
jects for Hindu employers. 

India's many religions — Hinduism, Jainism, Islam, 
Christianity, Zoroastrianism — reflect her racial, linguistic, 
and cultural variety. Hinduism and Islam, the major reli- 
gions, are divided into many sects and branches, whose 
teachings over the centuries have blended with the timeless 
beliefs, often ecstatic and magical, of animists who wor- 
ship the spirits of trees, rivers, animals, or ancestors. In all 
likelihood many of the highly evolved rituals, sacrifices, and 
spiritual disciplines, such as yoga, pranayama (breath con- 
trol), mantras (words of power), and trance, were adapted 
from the practices of animists. India's exploration of spiri- 
tual techniques — meditation, yantras and mandalas (psycho- 
cosmograms, or sacred diagrams of the cosmos), ecstatic 
dance, numerology, the use of mind-expanding herbs and 
mushrooms — has been sustained and profound. All that is 
"good" and all that is "bad" and every shade between — 
from focusing on points of light to firewalking and antino- 
mian coprophagy, to over- and underindulgence in almost 
everything from foods and liquids to the senses of sight, 
sound, smell, and touch — has been analyzed, codified, and 
tested. 

After the fourteenth century, as Hindu literature and 
religious texts were increasingly written in or translated 
into the vernacular dialects, Hinduism underwent a re- 
vival. Bhakti, or devotional, cults grew in popularity and 
achieved respectability under the influence of such mystics 
as Chaitanya (1485-1534) and Kabir (1440-1518), who sought 
to abolish caste and taught that the way to salvation was 
through bhakti-marga, the road of fervent devotion to God, 
rather than through knowledge or asceticism. Chaitanya, a 
poet who was born a Brahmin in Bengal, revered Krishna 
and his divine consort Radha. Kabir, who was born a Mus- 
lim, allowed his followers a choice of worshiping the Hindu 
gods or Allah. At his death, according to legend, Kabir's 
Hindu followers were determined to cremate his body; the 
Muslims insisted upon burial. But when they drew back 
the sheet that covered the' corpse they found it had turned 
to flowers. Half the blossoms were burned, the rest were 
buried. 

Most Indians are Hindus, followers of a religion as 
hard to define as the shape and texture of sunlight. Pene- 
trating every chink, its brilliance dazzles but also casts deep 
shadows. In keeping with India's diversity, Hinduism ad- 
justs to time, place, and personality. Like the land it is 
all-welcoming and all-transforming. Even Christians and 
Muslims have been touched by its influences. An evolved 
and evolving faith, without set creeds, dogmas, or prac- 



tices, with no church, no standardized worship, no single 
prophet or holy book, Hinduism could be described as a 
nonreligion that has absorbed every stage of Indian cul- 
tural and doctrinal belief, from animism to Brahminism, 
to the sectarianism of the Shaivites and Vaishnavites, on 
through reformed Hinduism and the more recent phase, 
which amalgamates metaphysics with patriotism. It could 
be argued that every Hindu creation is imbued with devo- 
tional spirit. Many Hindus follow a guru, and they tend to 
be guided by what they regard as their moral duty, or 
dharma, determined by their caste and stage of life: stu- 
dent, the time of celibacy and learning; householder, the 
years of marriage, parenthood, and worldly responsibility; 
hermit or ascetic, the phase of gradual withdrawal to the 
forest for meditation; or pilgrim, the stage of renunciation, 
when one breaks all ties with the world and prepares one's 
soul for dissolution into the universal spirit. 

Inasmuch as life is but illusion to Hindus, neither world- 
ly phenomena, including works of art, nor the hours or 
weeks required to make them, matter as much as in the 
West. Infinite amounts of time and skill are often expended 
on ephemera, especially when they are related to religion. 
In Bengal, for instance, extraordinary marriage pavilions 
of jute — as intricate as they are impermanent — are pre- 
pared for brides and grooms. Painstakingly detailed images 
of the goddess Kali are modeled in clay, polychromed, 
adorned with finery, and then, after a brief puja (worship), 
borne in procession to the riverbank and immersed. Holy 
earth reverts to mud. Perhaps because damaged images 
lose potency, damaged objects are not highly regarded. A 
Westerner or a Japanese might repair a fine but broken 
teacup; an Indian, reared in a tropical climate where deteri- 
oration is swift and immaculate cleanliness essential, would 
throw it away. Similarly, patinations on bronzes that would 
delight Western or Far Eastern connoisseurs are often cleaned 
in India. Indians are also less apt to venerate "old-fashioned" 
designs; a prince's inherited jewels are as likely as a villag- 
er's silver ornaments to be sent to the jeweler for redoing in 
celebration of tomorrow's wedding. 

The extended family is the nest of Indian culture, a 
legacy from pre-Aryan times. Family members share a 
residence, whether a hut or a palace complex, eat food from 
the same kitchen, hold property in common, and join to- 
gether in worship. Within the family, which usually includes 
several generations as well as those adopted into it, senior- 
ity is strictly observed, and everyone, from the male elder 
in charge to the most junior of wives, carries out his or her 
assigned tasks. If privacy is rare, the family provides secur- 
ity and companionship in high degree. Villages, where most 
families live, are the modules of existence. Village life is regu- 
lated by nature, by the sun and moon, by the cycle of seasons, 
by birth and death, and by human needs. Houses, usually 
built of mud and thatch, conform to the land and are scaled 
to people and domestic animals. Walls are soft-edged and 
curved as human arms, legs, or bellies. In such congenial 
settings, villagers gather by lamplight for storytelling and 
dramatic performances of ancient myths and legends. 

The values of village India extended up to all levels of 
society, affecting even Rajput princes and Mughal emper- 
ors. Examples abound of the influence of villages on art. 
The rustic thatched roof was translated into stone at Akbar's 
imperial City of Victory, Fatehpur-Sikri, and Indian princes 
often ate and drank from dishes and cups composed of 



24 



leaves — though their leaves were carved from jade. The 
feathers, shells, yak hair, beetle-wing cases, and other natu- 
ral materials used to adorn palaces and their occupants were 
all originally rural improvisations. The physical dimen- 
sions of art also reveal the impact of the villages, where 
every household maintains a small shrine, and size bears 
little relationship to importance. Just as the tiny tulsi plant 
symbolic of the goddess Lakshmi, consort of Vishnu, is 
more revered than the mighty banyan tree, so a small bronze 
image might be more monumental than one of towering 
proportions. 

Indeed, it would be difficult to exaggerate the impact 
on art of villagers, who in effect filter out its impurities, 
frequently breathing new life into sophisticated but tired 
themes from the courts or cities. This process is in evidence 
even today. Recently we took a motor trip from Chandigarh 
to the Punjab Hills. Near the metropolis the road signs 
cautioning "Sound Horn" were decorated with naturalis- 
tically curvaceous horns, admirable examples of fine aca- 
demic dullness. As we progressed into the hinterlands, the 
horns on the signs, now the work of village painters, grad- 
ually changed, becoming more and more simplified until 
in remote areas they seemed humanized, battered and bent 
by use, with delightful, emphatic little squiggles — the 
toots — emerging from them. 

The works in this exhibition date from 1300 to 1900, a 
period when India's invariable openness and vulnerability, 
and her genius for absorbing and transforming people and 
ideas, were again demonstrated as she faced yet two more 
waves of foreigners, the Muslims and the Europeans. 

Muslims first came to India in 712, less than a hundred 
years after the death of the Prophet, when Arab traders 
reached Sind in what is now Pakistan. Over the next three 
centuries, the teachings of Muhammad spread throughout 
Central Asia, and the armies of Islam gathered strength. In 
the eleventh and twelfth centuries, far greater forces led by 
rugged Turks and Afghans raided India through the north- 
western mountain passes, destroying as they pushed east- 
ward and southward magnificent medieval Brahminical 
and Buddhist temples and monuments, erasing forever part 
of the legacy of India's Great Tradition. The Muslim inva- 
sions dealt the final blow to Buddhist culture in North 
India, and at the outset of the fourteenth century, as now, 
most Indians were Hindus, Muslims, or animists whose 
tribal and folk traditions, always fundamental to Indian 
culture, flowed on almost impervious to distracting change. 
As the conquerors adjusted to their new surroundings, Is- 
lam's cultural heritage enriched and blended with India's, 
and by 1300 truly Indo-Muslim idioms were emerging in 
the art and architecture of the sultanates of North India and 
the Deccan. 

Another, far more vigorous Muslim invasion began in 
1525, when Babur, from the kingdom of Fergana in Rus- 
sian Turkistan, marched his army into northern India and 
occupied the Punjab. A year later, Babur defeated the last 
sultan of the weakened Lodi dynasty at Panipat and founded 
the Mughal empire. Babur was not only a mighty prince, 
descended from Timur (Tamerlane) and Chinghiz Khan, 
he was also a scholar and a poet, and we know from his 
autobiography that he considered life in his newly acquired 
territories inferior in many ways to the cultivated society 
he had left behind. Babur died in 1530, but his four-year 
reign initiated one of the most creative periods in India's 



cultural history, during which indigenous and foreign ideas 
intertwined in fresh patterns of great beauty and profundity. 

Meanwhile a subtler invasion had already started in 
the south. Vasco da Gama's visit to India in 1498 seemed a 
minor event at the time, but when he landed at Calicut, on 
the Malabar Coast some three hundred miles north of In- 
dia's southern tip, he opened the country to direct Euro- 
pean trade. Portuguese, Dutch, French, British, and other 
European merchants all vied for the India trade, and in the 
wake of the trading vessels came armies and navies. As had 
so often been the case, India's many kingdoms failed to 
unite against the new influx of foreigners, who established 
seaports and trading centers and gradually moved inland. 
During the second half of the eighteenth century, the Brit- 
ish not only overcame most of their European competitors 
but took over the by then splintering domains of the 
Mughals. By the mid-nineteenth century they dominated 
all of India, and after the failed Mutiny of 1857 they tight- 
ened their control. In 1877 Queen Victoria proclaimed her- 
self empress of India, and by the turn of the century India 
was the resplendent — and lucrative — mainstay of the Brit- 
ish empire. 

Although for six hundred years the accumulated incur- 
sions of Muslims and Europeans rocked the traditional 
social and cultural mountain, and many of those at the 
summit were cut from their roots, those nearer the bottom 
survived the quake. And because most of India's artists and 
craftsmen come from the base of the mountain, they ad- 
justed to each change in patronage and carried on with their 
habitual tenacity and ingenuity. Viewing the works of art 
brought together here evokes the men and women for whom 
they were created: priests and saints in temples and hermit- 
ages, tribal chiefs in jungle dwellings, sultans and mahara- 
jas in opulent city palaces. And one can envision the creators: 
weavers working to the accompaniment of gently clicking 
shuttles, artists seated cross-legged before drawing boards, 
enamelers pigmenting gold vessels in the glow of hot kilns, 
jade carvers working bow drills with their feet, jewelers 
cutting and polishing emeralds, armorers hammering and 
shaping elegant watered steel blades. 

The energy and inventiveness of India's traditions, 
whether animist, Hindu, or Muslim, are the greatness of 
her art. The Great Tradition and the tribal-village contin- 
uum are at once a huge storehouse, a vast repository of 
ancient motifs, techniques, and ideas, and a mighty dy- 
namo providing immense power. Strong in the way tides 
and the sun are strong, this natural resource is so pervasive 
as to have remained in effect invisible, and its most potent 
element — the people who created it — have often been taken 
for granted. From their ranks many of India's master artists 
and craftsmen have moved to the cities, shrines, and palaces 
to do their illustrious work, sometimes for generations, 
before quietly returning to the countryside in an ebb and 
flow over the centuries. The importance of the family and 
the caste system and the value placed on spiritual mysteries 
and hermetic knowledge have encouraged generation after 
generation of artists and craftsmen in family and guild 
workshops to invent, refine, preserve, and improve upon 
arcane skills and techniques. The virtuosity of these masters 
astonishes, and their creations often verge on the miraculous. 



This image of Shiva and a Parvati, also from Vijayanagar (no. 2), brilliantly 
represent South Indian bronze casting. Although their stylistic precursors, 
the renowned bronze sculptures created under the Chola kings who ruled in 
South India from about the ninth to the thirteenth century, are often consid- 
ered to exemplify the peak moment of such art, one could argue that post- 
Chola sculptures such as these also mark peaks. With the passage of time, 
the prescribed canons of proportion for images became more complex, with 
ever more exacting stipulations not only for trunk, limbs, and neck but for 
facial features as well, and the human (or divine) form tended to be inter- 
preted more stiffly, with increased formality. 

It is appropriate that our first example of the art of Vijayanagar is an 
image of potentially destructive Shiva, who descended from the Aryan storm 
god Rudra (the Roarer). Shiva is shown here in his calmer aspect as the 
auspicious one, bearer of happiness, but he is also the creator-destroyer, 
responsible for ending each age, or yuga, once it has run its cycle (the cur- 
rent age is kali-yuga, a black period that began in 3102 B.C.). The history of 
Vijayanagar is itself a demonstration of cyclical change, of the way in which 
the mighty tumble, giving way to more vigorous stock. Vijayanagar was 
founded in 1336 by two brothers, Harihara and Bukka, feudatories of the 
Hoysala kings of the Deccan, who in turn had succeeded the reputedly invin- 
cible Cholas. The empire flourished, and the capital city, on the banks of the 
Tungabhadra River on the site of the modern town of Hampi in Andhra 
Pradesh, became a luxurious metropolis, a center of Hindu art and culture. 
In about 1520, the Portuguese traveler Domingo Paes visited Vijayanagar 
and reported that the city was as large as Rome, with markets overflowing 
with jewels, textiles, spices, horses, and other riches, most of them brought 
by Portuguese traders from places as distant as Lisbon, Peking, Alexandria, 
Pegu, and Ormuz. 

In 1565 the great Vijayanagar empire, the last Hindu bulwark against 
the encroaching armies of Islam, was finally overtaken after two centuries 
of resistance. At the terrible Battle of Talikota, an alliance of sultans from 
the Dcccani kingdoms of Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, and Golconda at last wrested 
the remainder of the Deccani plateau from Hindu political control. The melee 
lasted only four hours. The king was captured and decapitated, and his head 
was flaunted on a spear before his demoralized forces. Only two years later, 
an Italian traveler named Caesaro Federico wrote that the city was "not 
altogether destroyed, yet the houses stand still and empty, and there is dwell- 
ing in them nothing, as is reported, but tygres and other wild beasts." 1 



1. 

SHIVA 

Vijayanagar, 14th— 15th century 
Bronze, height 35V4 in. (90.8 cm.) 
Asian Art Museum of San Francisco, 
The Avery Brundage Collection (B69.S14) 



1. Sewell, A Forgotten Empire, p. 208. 

Published: Rarities of the Asian Art Museum, p. 22, fig. 17. 



No one could deny the immense artistic and human appeal of this master- 
fully cast, crisply modeled and chased sculpture, with its sweetly compel- 
ling expression, superbly lissome yet ample figure, luxuriantly sinuous jewelry 
and coiffure, and costume vibrant with form-hugging folds. Late as it may 
be within South India's tradition of bronze casting, this is a powerful and 
movingly feminine envisionment of Shiva's consort Parvati, who represents 
generic woman — shakti, the tangible and noblest form of cosmic divine 
power — and is the benign aspect of Kali. Although as a tool for meditation 
(dhyana) the goddess could have been represented in other worshipful forms, 
she is embodied here as a stunning figurative image, a pratima. A devotee 
who is sufficiently pure in heart and able to take power from within can 
through the image's suprasensual beauty achieve the goal of worship: sama- 
dhi, or the merging of the perceiver with the perceived. At a yet higher 
spiritual level, this union of the divided divine can be affected without the 
image, by envisioning it in the mind's (or soul's) eye. 

According to Tantric philosophy (as more widely practiced in the north 



2. 

PARVATI 

Vijayanagar, ca. 1450 
Bronze, height 33 l A in. 
Private collection 



1.5 cm. 



2, back 



in medieval and post-medieval India), it is also possible to attain such release 
through worshiping a living woman, a human image: "On a Friday [the 
worshiper] is to invite and summon a beautiful maiden pleasing to his eye, 
in the bloom of youth, of great charm bedecked with all the auspicious 
symbols . . . and past puberty. He is to cleanse her body with bathing and 
ointments and place her upon the ceremonial seat. He is to adorn her accord- 
ing to the instructions, with perfumes, flowers, garments, and ornaments, 
and following this, adorn himself as well with ointments, flowers, and so 
forth. He is to install the deity into the maiden and offer her sacrifices through 
the ritual of touching. Once he has worshiped her m the proper ritual sequence, 
and sacrificed incense and candles to her . . . in his belief that she is the deity 
he is to delight her, in his loving devotion, with things to eat, each of which 
possesses one of the six types of flavors, with meat and other foods and 
sweetmeats. When he sees her delight at its peak, he is to utter the Goddess' 



sacred formula, himself filled with the joy of youthful vigor, and his thoughts 
totally immersed in the ritual image of the deity. Once he has with unwaver- 
ing attention offered up to her the spoken formula, among other things, one 
thousand and eight times, let him pass the night with her. Whoever wor- 
ships in this way for three, five, seven, or nine Fridays receives benefits 
beyond measure deriving from his piety." 1 

1. Kularnava Tantra X. 39-45. See: Zimmcr, Artistic Form and Yoga, pp. 211-12. 



In Indian art, as in life, things are not always what they seem. This emaci- 
ated crone baring her fangs is in fact a representation of the sixth-century 
poetess Karaikkalammaiyar, the earliest of sixty-three Shaivite saints who 
lived between the sixth and ninth centuries and composed devotional hymns 
in the Tamil language for use in temple rituals. Their fervent outpourings of 



3. 

KARAIKKALAMMAIYAR 

South India, ca. 14th century 

Bronze, height 16-Vh in. (41.5 cm.) 

The Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art, Kansas 

City, Missouri, Nelson Fund (33.533) 





3 



devout love contributed to the growth of the bhakti (devotional) cults, which 
espouse an ecstatic mode of Hindu worship, that began early in the Chris- 
tian era and continue to this day. 1 

Karaikkalammaiyar's original name was Punitavati, and she was the 
daughter of the chief of Karikal, a village on the southeastern coast of India 
near the city of Nagapattinam. Devoted even as a child to Shiva, after her 
marriage to a rich merchant named Paramatattan she continued her devo- 
tions to the god. One day, when Paramatattan received two mangoes as gifts 
from a customer, Punitavati gave one of them to a Shaivite ascetic. When 
her husband asked for the mango, she prayed to Shiva, and a deliciously ripe 
fruit appeared in her hand. Paramatattan, alarmed, became so fearful of his 
wife's divine powers that he abandoned her. Punitavati asked Shiva to re- 
place her now useless beauty with the misshapen form of a demon. At once 
her flesh melted away and she became a skeleton. Flowers showered from the 
sky, thunder resounded, and the ascetics and troops of Shiva danced with 
joy around her. Her parents offered their homage, and she was then left alone 
to begin a new life as a religious mendicant. 

Punitavati began to compose poems in praise of her divine master Shiva, 
and soon she set forth on a pilgrimage to his abode atop Mount Kailash in the 
Himalayas. To avoid defiling the sacred mountain with her footsteps she 
climbed the steep slopes on her hands. Shiva sighted her and was amazed. 
Beckoning to her, he called, "Come, Mother!" And henceforth Punitavati 
was known as Karaikkalammaiyar (the mother of Karikal). As a boon she 
asked only that she might always stay close by Shiva's feet as he danced. 
Shiva assented and instructed her to go back to South India, to Tiruvalangadu, 
the site of his sublime victory in a dance contest with the goddess Kali. 
There the saint dwells to this day, and sculpted reliefs often show her emaci- 
ated figure seated beneath the upraised legs of Shiva Nataraja (Lord of the 
Dance), playing her cymbals and singing with joy. 

1. Fickle, "Karaikkalammaiyar, Saint and Poetess," from which much of the infor- 
mation in this entry has been taken. 

Published: Kramrisch, The Art of India, p. 212, pi. 150; Art of the Orient, p. 140; 
Rowland, "Indian Art," p. 974. 



4. 

A PAIR OF DVARAPALAS 
Kerala, probably 16th century 
Bronze, height 44 Vz in. (113 cm.) 
State Museum, Trichur 



Amiably forceful, these bronze guardian figures from Dravidian India, 
where many regional styles evolved, exemplify the vigorous school of Kerala. 
Combining folkloristic power with opulence and stark simplicity with dense 
elaboration, they should be envisioned in their original setting, at the door- 
way of a temple or shrine that was probably built of wood and round in 
ground plan. They once provided coruscating accents to backgrounds so un- 
adorned and subtly proportioned as to remind one of Zen gardens or Cycladic 
marbles. 

The doors (dvaras) of temples, palaces, or homes were believed to be 
unlucky unless they were decorated with auspicious symbols. According to 
the Rig Veda (X.110.5), gods enter the temple enclosure "like morning light 
passing through the portals of the western sky." The lower segments of 
doors were considered particularly vulnerable and hence required doorkeep- 
ers, or dvarapalas, which in the south were placed outside the main temple 
unit. Dvarapalas usually bear the insignia of the gods whose sanctuary they 
protect; these two figures have the third eye of Shiva on their foreheads. 

Of all the bronzes known from Kerala, the Trichur dvarapalas, with 
their demonic energy, wrestler's agility, and flamboyant ornaments, are the 
most impressive. Their bold earrings sprout lions and elephants, both sym- 
bolic of unknowable power in the iconography of Kerala. The inverted arches 
of their exuberant belts, from which draperies and jeweled tassels flare with 
cosmic force, are held together by lionlike "faces of glory," the kirttimukhas 
that are a potent symbol of Shiva. Their armbands are shaped like makaras, 
crocodilian monsters of the primeval waters, from whose gaping mouths pour 
forth frothing strings of pearls and festoons. 

Local authorities say that these dvarapalas originally belonged to the 
Thekkadeth temple of Shiva, which was destroyed along with many others 



30 




, detail 



during Tipu Sultan's devastating march through the territory of Cochin 
(now part of the state of Kerala) in 1789 (see no. 188). They were discovered 
during the cleaning of a well, where they may have been placed for safety, 
and were brought to the Trichur Museum in 1916. 



Religious reverence and human warmth join in this honey smooth image. 
The sculptor dared to approach the divine with startling intimacy, breaking 
through the usual barriers that separate men and gods. Following nature 
more than traditional canons, he envisioned Krishna and his foster mother 
Yashoda as a familiar infant and wetnurse, not as idealized sacred images. 
Their flesh is palpable; their expressions are truer to life than to the realm of 
the gods. The artist's zest for the subject is clear not only in the lively figures 
but in the sensuous undulation of hair and the swoop of Yashoda's hemline. 

The treatment is appropriate. Lord Krishna, whose name means dark, 
is the most accessible of the Hindu deities, a god of youth who gradually 
emerged from ancient sacred mystery and legend. It is believed that in 
pre-Aryan times Krishna was adored by a tribe that deified cows. In the 
Vedic literature of ancient India, he appears as a worshiper of cattle. In the 
Mahabharata (The Book of Wars; see no. 21), he is referred to as a lowly 
cowherd, one of whose wives is an untouchable. In the Harivamsa (The 



5. 

YASHODA AND KRISHNA 

Karnataka, 14th century or later 

Copper, height \2>Vx in. (33.3 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 

Purchase, Lita Annenberg Hazen Charitable 

Trust Gift, in honor of Cynthia Hazen and 

Leon Bernard Polsky (1982.220.8) 



33 



Genealogy of Hari) and the Bhagavad Gita (The Song of the Lord), Krishna 
is the eighth avatar of Vishnu, who took his form to slay the tyrant Kamsa. 

When a sage warned Kamsa, the tyrannical ruler of Mathura, that he 
would be slain by one of the sons of Devaki, he ordered that Devaki's first 
six offspring be murdered at birth. But when Balarama, the seventh son of 
Devaki and Vasudcva, was conceived, Vishnu arranged a miracle and the 
fetus was transferred to the womb of Rohini, Vasudcva's second wife. When 
Devaki's eighth son, Krishna, was born, Devaki and Vasudeva were 
imprisoned. Vishnu again interceded. Their chains broke and clattered to 
the floor, the guards fell asleep, and Vasudcva spirited the babe to safety 
across the Jamuna River, whose waters obligingly parted for him. Krishna 
was delivered for safekeeping and nursing to Yashoda, wife of the cowherd 
Nanda, who protected him from Kamsa's order to slaughter all infants. 
Krishna grew up in the sacred groves of Vnndavan (the herd forest), in the 
world of the gopis and gopalas (herds women and herdsmen), where he 
developed his talents as the Divine Lover. Krishna's initial miracle was the 
destruction of the demoness Putana. Unaware when she offered him her 
breast to suckle that her milk was poison, he indulged his healthy thirst, 
draining Putana to the last drop— and reducing her to a desiccated heap of 
skin, hair, gristle, and bones. 

Published: Pal, The Sensuous Immortals, pp. 128-29, no. 74; Notable Acquisition* 
1982-1983, cover and pp. 80-81. 



An entire exhibition could be held of Indian oil lamps, so remarkable are 
their variety and quality, and the lamps of Kerala are among the most appeal- 
ing and imaginative. There are lamps for prayer and for offerings, lamps in 
the form of the goddess of wealth for shrine entrances, lamps to illuminate 
the inner sanctuary, peacock lamps, swan lamps, tower-shaped lamps, and 
the brass lamps, their handsome, simple shapes perfected over the centuries, 
that throw light, at just the right level, on the actors' faces at kathakali 
performances. 

This bronze lamp in the form of a two-story wooden temple, raised 
from the wick and oil container by two pairs of horses and hanging from 
chains of continuous links cast in a single mold, once glowed in the central 
shrine of a temple. With its lion masks, curling finials, roof tiles, and crowd 
of worshipers, the lamp transports one to Kerala, where such scenes are part 
of life. The squat, spirited figures and folkish energy are typical of Kerala 
bronze sculpture, as is the dark, rugged patination, suggestive of black earth. 



6. 

LAMP IN THE FORM OF A TEMPLE 
Kerala, 15th century 

Bronze, height without chain 28 in. (71.7 cm.), 
diameter I6V2 in. (41.9 cm.) 
State Museum, Trichur 





6 



35 



7 



7. 

CHARAKKU 

Kerala, probably 17th— 19th century 
Bell metal, height I6V2 in. (41.9 cm.) 
diameter 52 in. (132.1 cm.) 
State Museum, Trichur 



Kerala bronzes range from flamboyantly rich, darkly patinatcd figures 
(such as the dvarapalas, no. 4) to austere, often nobly spare utilitarian ob- 
jects like this charakku, one of a pair. Charakkus are used for cooking and 
serving feasts at religious festivals and at marriages. Temples and families 
often specially commissioned charakkus for such occasions. This majestic 
vessel, whose stark planes and rhythmic spatial nuances call to mind the 
wooden architecture of Kerala, stands out not only for its size and architec- 
tonic perfection but for its excellent craftsmanship and superbly modeled 
detail. The functionally sturdy but animatedly scrolling handles and the re- 
liefs beneath them, which seem to be birds' heads reminiscent of "animal- 
style" art of the Migration period, are as unusual in form and shape as in 
artistic quality. The salamander and the solar and lunar symbols cast in relief 
on the sides may be maker's marks. Such objects are very hard to date, for 
their designs have changed little over the centuries; this bell metal charakku 
might have been made as early as the seventeenth century or as late as the 
nineteenth. Although the demand for them has lessened, craftsmen in Kerala 
still make handsome charakkus by the traditional cire perdue technique (see 
no. 51). 



KINDI 

Kerala, ca. 18th century 

Bell metal, height 814 in. (21.1 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 

Art, Hyderabad (83.2) 



This ewerlike vessel for holding and pouring water represents one of the 
most elegant of several types of metalware objects that have been made for 
centuries in Kerala. Kindis are still made in sizes varying from three to twelve 
inches high. They are used for both domestic purposes and rituals and are a 
common sight in homes and temples all over Kerala and the neighboring 
districts. 

The artisans traditionally engaged in bell metal casting, for which Kerala 
is well known, are the Moosaris, one of the occupational communities of 
the Kammala caste, whose name means maker of an article pleasing to the 
eye. Their achievements in alloying metals and in shaping, casting, and 
finishing objects, large and small, are unrivaled in India. 

The belly of this kindi is a compressed globular shape, its gently grooved 
neck is high and shapely, and the upturned pouring spout attached to the 
belly is long and tapering, like a tender shoot. A channeled rim around the 
neck ornaments the vessel, and a flaring foot ring acts as a base, completing 
its classically elegant profile. It is difficult to assign precise dates to kindis 
because the same shapes and alloys have been used for hundreds of years. 



j.M. 



36 



8 



Hooded cobras with intertwining tails dance in attendance around this 
wooden mask of Kali (the Black One), the goddess who is the terrible as- 
pect of Parvati, wife of Shiva (see no. 2). Wood, which was plentiful in 
Kerala, was used more often than stone or bronze for both building and 
image making. Indeed, the chunky opulence of Kerala bronze figures often 
stems in part from prototypes in wood, which could be carved and modeled 
with case. But the tropical climate, insects, and political upheavals have 
dealt harshly with objects made of wood, and very few have survived. In 
the absence of comparable material it is difficult to date this lintel with 
precision. Although Kali's enormous earrings are embellished with lion and 
elephant motifs similar to those on the dvarapalas (no. 4), it seems likely 
that this piece, once polychromed, is earlier. Its rhythms are even bolder, its 
forms broader. All bulbous eyes, upturned fangs, and snakes, it must have 
been awesome in its original position above a temple door, where soft light 
from below would have increased its daunting magnificence. 



9. 

KALI WITH COBRAS 

Kerala, probably 14th century 

Wood, traces of polychrome, 2\% X 56% in. 

(55 x 144 cm.) 

Collection Dr. and Mrs. Aschwin de Lippe, 
Paris 



10. 

IVORY THRONE LEG 
Orissa, 13th century 
Height WA in. (36.8 cm.) 
Philadelphia Museum of Art, Gift of 
Mrs. John B. Stetson, Jr. (60-96-1) 



Ivory carving is an ancient craft in India, and rarely was the art raised to the 
heights it reached in medieval Orissa, where this throne leg was carved on 
royal commission. Although lions and elephants, with their natural majesty 
and symbolic consequence, frequently inspired Indian painters and sculptors 
to peaks of accomplishment, few outshine this carving, an extraordinary 
composition in which fleeting royal worldliness perfectly coalesces with cos- 
mic, eternal truth. 

The gaja-simha, the war elephant of kings and the king of beasts himself, 
lends his power to the ruler's throne by triumphing over the enemy, a wild 
man decked out in plumes and necklaces. In India's mythological jungle one 
frequently meets compound beasts such as this gaja-simha, in which the 
wisdom and might of the elephant arc joined with the supreme solar energy 
of the lion, whose mane flares like sunlight and whose claws seem invincible. 
Gaining strength, like Hercules, from contact with the rugged earth below, 
the divine zoomorph supports the enthroned king not only physically but 
morally by defeating the terrible demon, the rakshasa. 

The sculptor took advantage of the massive tusk's natural bend not 
only to increase the leg's strength as a support but to emphasize the de- 




ll ), front 




10, side 



phant's head and trunk and the generous belly of the writhing demon. Ob- 
served realities — muscles, flashing eyes, fleshy amplitude; the teel of skin, 
fur, and hide; rhythmically repeated beads; waves of hair, folds of cloth, 
foliage, and crags — are in harmonious balance with the sculptor's inner vi- 
sion of sinuous plastic power. 

Orissa, where this sculpture was made, has often been the setting of 
conflict between aboriginals and waves of newcomers eager to push them 
ever farther into remote districts. Narasimha I, who ruled Orissa from 1238 
to 1264 and probably commissioned the magnificent Temple of the Sun at 
Konarak, not only controlled the tribal people but fought off the Muslims 
of Bengal. On the basis of its stylistic affinities to other Konarak sculptures, 
the Philadelphia throne leg has been ascribed to Narasimha's reign. 1 

1. For related sculptures from Konarak, see: Zimmer, The Art of Indian Asia, pi. 365. 
For a later, more elaborately detailed but less sculpturally powerful throne leg, now 
in the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., see: Lippe, The Freer Indian Sculptures, 
pp. 41-46, figs. 41-47. 

Published: Kramrisch, "Early Indian Ivory Carving," pp. 55-66; Van Lohuizen-De 
Leeuw, "Indian Ivories," pp. 195-216; Kramrisch, Indian Sculpture, p. 83, no. 39, pi. 58. 





11, front 



11, back 



Voluptuous in shape and feel, this ivory comb must have prepared many a 
lover for rendezvous as countless as their fragrantly oiled hairs. Few materi- 
als are as sensuous as ivory, and none so improves through devoted handling. 
In this instance, the intrinsic seductiveness of the material is reinforced by 
the scenes carved in relief on both sides of the comb, which can be attrib- 
uted to a spirited ivory carver working in the delightfully forceful style of 
Orissa, where the Great Tradition survived into the nineteenth century. 

The carving on one side illustrates the story of Krishna as Vastraharana 
(Thief of Clothes), an especially popular incident in the adventures of 
Krishna as a boy growing up among the cowherds of Vrindavan, tales in 
which the Dark God takes on qualities sometimes associated with the Greek 
god Apollo. One day at dawn the gopis went to the Jamuna River, where 
each of them prayed to Devi to grant her fondest wish, to have Krishna as 
her husband. They then doffed their clothing and jumped playfully into the 
river, unaware that their beloved Krishna had followed them and was enjoy- 
ing the scene from high in a nearby kadamba tree. Krishna descended stealth- 



11. 

IVORY COMB 

Orissa, 17th century 

3'/4X3in. (8.3x7.6 cm.) 

National Museum, New Delhi (74.96) 



ily from his hiding place, gathered up their clothes, and climbed back into 
the branches, which he decorated with his brightly colored spoils. Seeing 
their skirts and scarves flapping like banners in the tree, the girls were ap- 
palled, and fascinated. Love and embarrassment were in the balance when 
the playful god made matters worse by offering to return the clothes if the 
gopis would come to him. The bashful young ladies refused, pleading that 
they were cold and that the joke had gone too far. But the smiling, bantering 
god was adamant, and one by one, covering their nakedness as best they 
could, the gopis inched toward the tree. Clever Krishna then accused them 
of offending the river spirit with their nudity, promising he would be ap- 
peased if they raised their arms worshipfully above their heads. Mortified, 
the girls reached awkwardly for the sky, but with one arm only, struggling 
to retain a degree of modesty with the other. But again Krishna was 
dissatisfied, and in the end the shy, well-brought-up young girls of Vrindavan 
complied with Krishna's wishes, for which they received the promise of his 
divine love. The other face of the comb is carved with three figures amo- 
rously entangled in a pavilion, their scarves waving in the breeze like the 
gopis' clothing. 

Published: Banerjee, The Life of Krishna, p. 99. 



12. 

PANEL OF A COSMETICS BOX 
Tamil Nadu, probably Madurai, 
probably late 17th century 
Ivory, 6 X 12 3 /s in. (15.2 X 31.4 cm.) 
Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, Richmond, 
The Glasgow Fund (80.171) 



After the fall of the Vijayanagar empire in 1565 (see no. 1), many of the 
Hindu governors of its two hundred or so southern provinces formed sepa- 
rate kingdoms. Even before the Battle of Talikota, the Nayaks (literally, 
governors), some of whom were members of the Vijayanagar royal house, 
had exerted considerable independence. Now they became all-powerful. Most 
of the Nayaks continued their lavish patronage of music, dance, literature, 
and art; some built major architectural complexes. At Madurai, under Tirumala 
Nayak (r. 1623-59), a cultural flowering that extended to all the arts pro- 
duced a great double temple dedicated to Shiva and his consort Minakshi, as 
well as many ivories. 

This carved panel from a cosmetics box (probably the front, as it is fitted 
with a keyhole) is believed to be from Madurai. The pairs and trios of figures, 
long limbed, slightly bulbous and steatopygic, stooping, and cramped by 
the archways in which they stand, are the stylistic descendants of stone sculp- 
tures commissioned by Tirumala Nayak. In the small museum recently opened 




40 



at the temple at Madurai are several excellent ivories from a small coffer of 
the Nayak period that are similar in style to the Virginia panel, 1 and in the 
temple museum at Srirangam is an ivory carving, also in a style much like 
this, that has been identified as a depiction of Tirumala Nayak with his queen. 2 

1. The coffer was found recently at Bath; other sections from it arc in a London 
collection and in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 

2. For the Srirangam carving, see: Sivaramamurti, The Art of India, pi. 58. For paint- 
ings in a similar style, see: Sivaramamurti, South Indian Paintings, figs. 78, 79. 

Published: "Art of Asia Acquired," p. 97, fig. 47. 




South Indian temple complexes are bustling centers not only of worship 
but of the arts, music, dance, and virtually all of life. Often vast in size, with 
large courtyards and a tank for purifying baths, they provide areas for 
meditation, contemplation, study, conversation, and rest, as well as for rituals. 
If temples are active from day to day, with continuous rites lasting into the 
night, they are even busier at festival times, when crowds of pilgrims gather 
from far and wide for services and feasting. Each temple has a large staff of 
priests who carry out both religious and administrative duties, and there arc 
many attendants (some of whom look after the temple elephants stabled 
within the compound). Masons, sculptors, bronze casters, painters, and other 
artists and craftsmen — all on the staff — devote their lives to maintaining the 
temple's sculptures, wall paintings, and ritual implements, and they add to 
its artistic wealth whenever a donor offers to endow a new palanquin or 
jeweled gold crown for an image, or whenever the trustees and priests ex- 
press the need for an additional shrine, carving, or picture. 



13. 

TEMPLE HANGING WITH EPISODES 
FROM THE RAMAYANA (THE STORY 
OF RAMA) 

Probably Tamil Nadu, 18th century 
Cotton, embroidered and appliqued, 
6 ft. 7 in. x 33 ft. 2 in. (2.07 x 11.09 m.) 
National Museum, New Delhi (62.538) 



41 



This magnificent textile hanging was probably commissioned by an 
important temple complex, if not made in its own workshop, sometime in 
the eighteenth century. An oblong of well-woven cotton more than thirty 
feet long and six feet high, it is a masterpiece of skillful applique work 
and embroidery in a wide range of stitches. Mythological scenes patterned 
on contemporaneous mural paintings fill the large central panel (illustrated 
here) and the three smaller ones flanking it on each side, as well as the 
borders running across the top and bottom edges. The scenes appear to 
depict episodes from the Ramayana (The Story of Rama), one of the greatest 
Hindu epics. The hanging was probably made to embellish a decorative 
arch or a hall or cloister in a temple during a Vaishnavite festival. Its exact 
provenance is not known, but it is reported to have come from a site on the 
border between Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. The style of the figures, 
lively despite their usually frontal poses, and of the geometric ornament 
arranged in tiers recalls the Nayak wall paintings in the seventeenth-century 
Kapardisvara temple at Tiruvalanjuli, near Tanjore in Tamil Nadu. 1 

The adventures of Rama, the legendary hero of the Ramayana, have 
been illustrated countless times in many mediums in Indian art (see, for 
example, nos. 24, 58, 232, 268, 272, 277). Rama, the eldest son of Dasaratha, 
king of Kosala, spent his childhood in the capital city of Ayodhya, prepar- 
ing to inherit his father's throne. But when the guileful Kaikeyi (one of 
Dasaratha's four wives) had her own son Bharata declared heir apparent, 
Rama, his wife Sita, and his half brother Lakshmana were exiled to the 
Dandaka Forest. There they lived in idyllic peace until Sita was carried off 
by Ravana, the demonic monarch of Lanka (Sri Lanka). Rama and Lakshmana 
sought the aid of Sugriva the monkey king, and with Hanuman (Sugriva's 
counselor) and a host of monkey troops they stormed the fort at Lanka, 
killed the king, and rescued Sita. After years in exile, the three returned to 
Ayodhya, where Rama regained his kingdom. 




13, detail 



13, detail O 



The Ramayana is generally believed to have been part of the indigenous 
oral tradition, to have first been given literary form, in Prakrit, by Buddhists, 
and then to have been reworked and translated into Sanskrit in the first or 
second century. The Sanskrit epic, a poem of 48,000 lines arranged in seven 
books, was long considered the work of a single author, Valmiki (who is 
said to have been a robber, probably of non-Aryan origin, before his poetic 
talent was recognized by a sage), but most scholars now agree that it must 
have undergone many stages of development. In later versions, under Brahmin 
influence, Rama, originally a human hero, "the jewel of the Solar kings," 
was deified as an incarnation of Vishnu; his rival, King Ravana, became a 
demon; and Rama's rescue of Sita was reinterpreted as an Aryan triumph 
over the barbarians. Regional variations also exist. Whoever designed this 
temple hanging probably drew both from the text ascribed to Valmiki and 
from local South Indian versions. 

At the top left corner of the hanging, the story opens with Rama's first 
meeting with the monkey god Hanuman, after Sita has been abducted. The 
rest of the upper border seems to be an account of Rama's and Lakshmana's 
stay at Kishkindhya, home of Sugriva, the monkey king, where they help 
Sugriva defeat his tyrannical half brother Bali, see him installed as king, and 
finally persuade him to aid in the search for Sita. In the scenes embroidered 
on the left side of the bottom border, Sugriva dispatches monkeys to look 
for Sita, and Rama gives his ring to Hanuman. When the monkeys learn 
where Sita is concealed, Hanuman leaves for Lanka, where he finds Sita in 
an ashoka grove. Hanuman gives her Rama's ring, she entrusts her jewel to 
him, and, after destroying the grove, he allows himself to be captured. The 
last scene on the right side of the border shows an astonished Hanuman 
beholding Ravana, the ten-headed demon. For the largest, most elaborate 
illustration (the center panel shown here), the designers seem to have chosen 
the climactic episode of the Ramayana: the coronation of Rama after the 
exiled hero's glorious return to Ayodhya. 

1. For the wall paintings at Tiruvalanjuli, see: Sivaramamurti, South Indian Paintings, 
figs. 84-86. 

Published: "Decorative Arts," pp. 13-14, 16-20. 

I am grateful to Jagdish Mittal for having brought this important textile to my atten- 
tion, and to Krishna Lai, whose account of the hanging I have followed, for her 
perceptive and enthusiastic comments. 



14. 

LINGAYAT PENDANT IN THE 
FORM OF NANDI 
Northwestern Karnataka, probably 
Hubli-Dharwar, early 17th century 
Silver, cast, chased, and engraved, 
height 4 '/s in. (10.4 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.1456) 



This image of the bull Nandi is not a sculpture for worship but a pendant 
worn by a Lingayat guru (spiritual teacher) or jangama (itinerant priest). The 
Lingayat (lingam wearer) religion started also as a sociocultural movement in 
the twelfth century at Kalyani, the capital of the western Chalukya kings. 
Basavanna, the Chalukya officer who founded the revolutionary Shaivite 
faith, revived an old form of lingam worship, and he is believed to have 
introduced the practice of wearing the lingam (a stylized phallic symbol of 
Shiva). With a brave band of four saint reformers, Basavanna soon found a 
large following in the region that is now Karnataka state, and today there arc 
also many Lingayats in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. Lingayats elevate 
their clergy to a special position: a jangama is regarded as a form of Shiva, 
"a moving temple." 1 

The lingam is worn around the neck in a silver box, usually a chauka, 
which is a peculiar shape with two pointed projections and two ornamental 
knobs at the top, or a gundgurdgi, which is egg-shaped. Lingayat clergy 
don large pendants, laity smaller ones, the size varying according to the 
wearer's means. Our pendant is the only known example that is shaped like 
a recumbent bull instead of a chauka or a gundgurdgi. Its significance lies 
not only in its rarity but, even more, in the exquisite execution and sensitive 
rendering of the Nandi as an image rather than a mere ornament. It was 
evidently made, possibly as a gift, for some very important clergyman, 



14 



more than likely at Hubli-Dharwar in northwestern Karnataka, a region still 
well known for its silversmiths. 

The Nandi fulfills its function as Shiva's vahana (vehicle) in more than 
one way. In its theophany as Nandin, it is the Happy One in the presence of 
Shiva. Some consider that the bull was the theriomorphic form of Shiva, 
which later became his vehicle, some that it represents the fertility aspect of 
Shiva. According to others, the Nandi is an embodiment of dharma (moral 
law); as Stella Kramrisch interprets it, "Nandin/Dharma corresponds to the 
twofold meaning of the linga, its sexual power transmuted into intellectual 
command." 2 For Lingayats the bull has added meaning, for they believe 
Basavanna to be an incarnation of Nandi. 

In this pendant, the elaborately bejeweled Nandi is seated upon a rectan- 
gular pedestal enriched with four ornamental knobs, two on each end, and 
two rows of foliate motif incised on the sides. The pendant opens at the 
base, and the detachable underside is richly ornamented: within a narrow 
border, a central floral medallion is flanked by rampant lions, and between 
their heads a double-headed mythical bird, the ganda-bherunda, is surmounted 
by two scalloped arches with floral ornament on the spandrels. From con- 
stant use Nandi's mouth and legs are worn, and two detachable knobs are 
missing, one from each side. 

J.M. 

1. Ishwaran, Religion and Society, p. 62. 

2. Kramrisch, Manifestations of Shiva, p. 29, no. 26. 



Short, sturdy elephant goads, or ankuses, terminating in daggerlike blades 
and massive hooks are the traditional implements employed by mahouts 
(elephant drivers) to steer, prod, or poke their mounts. These two examples, 
made by the same workshop if not by the same sculptor-craftsman, go far 
beyond the basic form of such objects. Their royal splendor suits them to 
great occasions such as Dasara, the festival celebrating the war between good 
and evil which at Mysore is marked by a grand, brilliantly colorful parade 
of caparisoned elephants bearing the maharaja and other dignitaries. 

Chiseled, carved, engraved, pulled, twisted, hammered, inlaid with gold 
or silver, alive with deities and "faces of glory," the kirttimukhas symboliz- 



15. 

TWO ELEPHANT GOADS 

Tanjorc or Mysore, probably 17th century 

a. Cut steel, length 25 in. (63.5 cm.) 
Government Museum, Madras 

b. Forged and cut steel, inlaid with silver and 
gold, length 27 in. (68.5 cm.) 

Musec Guimet, Paris (p. 426) 



45 



ing the destructive aspect of Shiva, as well as lions, tigers, and vegetal 
ornament, these two goads, along with four or five others of the same facture, 
represent Indian steelwork at its most intricate. Although they have long 
been admired by specialists, their specific provenance is not known. A few 
of the other examples came from the armory of the Nayaks of Tanjore, and 
some of them are associated with the Wodeyar dynasty of Mysore. The 
workmanship here is similar to that on some South Indian katars that have 
been dated to the seventeenth century. 1 

1. For other goads of this sort, as well as a vambrace and katars in related styles, see: 
Watt, Indian Art, pp. 461-62, pis. 4, 67. 

Published: 

b. Auboyer and Goepper, The Oriental World, pp. 70-71, no. 50. 



A seventeenth-century Indian battle was an assemblage of the creations 
of armorers, chariot makers, weavers, artists, and many other craftsmen who 
worked for years to prepare the weapons and banners and hundreds of other 
objects sacrificed to the fray. A master armorer shaped this thick steel armguard 
with the potent mask of a heaving, crushing war elephant. The vambrace is 
believed to have been part of the armory at Tanjore, where the Nayak dy- 
nasty assumed power after the fall of Vijayanagar in 1565. 



16. 

VAMBRACE 

Probably Tanjore, late 17th century 
Steel, length ISVa in. (40 cm.) 
Government Museum, Madras (1977) 




47 




17. 

SWORD WITH ZOOMORFHIC HILT 

Inscribed: "Adoni" 

Vijayanagar, mid-16th century 

Steel, hilt of gilded bronze, length 33 in. 

(83.8 cm.) 

Government Museum, Bikaner (B.M.650) 



On the basis of the inscription, it seems reasonable to assume that this 
splendid sword was captured with other swords and daggers in 1689 at the 
siege of the Bijapur fort of Adoni by a Rajput who served with Aurangzeb's 
armies in the Deccan. The sword was surely at Adoni prior to 1568, when 
Sultan c Ali c Adil-Shah I of Bijapur (r. 1558-80) captured the fort from the 
rajas of Bijanagur, then a lingering outpost of the Vijayanagar empire. 

The hilt brings to mind the bronzes and architecture of Vijayanagar, 
which are rooted in the earlier manner of the Cholas. Unlike the richly 
jeweled later hilts seen here (nos. 127, 130, 133), which are rarely adorned 
with more than one animal, this one of gilded bronze teems with life. Its 
melange of animals recalls the symplegma of beasts in "animal-style" art, 
which was probably brought to India in ancient times by the Scythians and 
in this instance preserved in the south. Entangled in the design are a snake, a 
peacock, and a lion carrying a small elephant in its paw. 



Published: Goetz, The Art and Architecture, fig. 63. 




17, detail 



17 



Goi.n ji:whi ry has been enjoyed and treasured in India suite ancient times. 
Not surprisingly, considering the retentiveness of the Indian tradition, a 
number of gold objects from Harappa in the Indus Valley, which could date 
to as early as 2300 B.C., are identical to modern versions from village India. 
For more than four thousand years, Indian artisans have shaped and sol- 
dered gold into glittering, eye-catching forms that take full advantage of the 
material. Pieces from the first century B.C. reveal astounding technical and 
artistic brilliance, equaling the most remarkable specimens of the same pe- 
riod trom other parts of the ancient world. 1 

Of South Indian provenance, this necklace probably dates to the seven- 
teenth century. Stylistic affinities with theatrical jewelry seen in kathakali per- 
formances suggest Kerala as a possible point of origin. Very little gold jewelry 
from this period is available for inspection, and our knowledge of it depends 
largely on representations in sculptures and paintings. At up-to-date Indian 
courts, "old-fashioned" jewelry was often melted down and reshaped, and 
most of the dazzling pieces, often cast, chiseled, and chased, sometimes 
inset with jewels and enamel, that have been preserved in private collections 
and in the great temple treasuries are inaccessible. 

Like most Indian gold jewelry, this necklace should be seen in use, with 
its rhythmic tumble of sparkling accents and flowing chains conforming to 
and enhancing the wearer's anatomy. Superb in overall design and crafts- 
manship, it can be assigned to a workshop that specialized in working with 
eold wire. The S-shaped clasp, deftly wrapped with gold strands, is so sub- 
tly magnificent that it may have been placed against the chest rather than 
behind the neck. 

1. For a pair of gold ear ornaments, sec: Lcrner, The Flame and the Lotus, pp. 20-21, 
no. 2. 



( iOLD NECKLACE 
South India, probably 17th century 
Length 43 3 /4 in. (111.1 cm.) 
Private collection 



Overleaf, 19, detail > 



A family of minstrels of the Kunepullalu caste once owned this splendid 
painted scroll made from fine handwoven cotton. Moving from village to 
village in the Telangana region of northwestern Andhra Pradesh, in the heart 
of the Deccan, the storytellers earned their living staging performances for 
members of the Padmasali community. Each evening for a week the Pad- 
masalis, who are a subcaste of the Salis, a caste of weavers, would gather 
to watch and listen as the performers recounted, in prose, verse, and song, 
episodes from the life of the rishi (sage) Bhavana, their legendary progenitor. 

When the sage Markandeya, so the story goes, wanted to provide the 
gods with clothing he performed a ritual. From the flames of the sacrificial 
fire Bhavana issued forth, holding a ball of thread he had manufactured 
from the fibers of the lotus (padma) that sprang from Vishnu's navel, and 
with this thread Bhavana wove celestial garments for the devas. Bhavana 
married Bhadravati, daughter of the Sun, and she bore him one hundred and 
one sons. One son was the first of the Pattusalis; one hundred sons were the 
forefathers of the Padmasalis. 

Performances by the storytellers always opened with prayers to Ganesha, 
the elephant-headed Hindu deity who is invoked before any undertaking. 
Ganesha's large image appears on the first panel of the scroll. Speaking in 
the vernacular Telegu, the narrator then began to tell the story. Three or four 
other members of the family played instruments or occasionally joined in 
the singing. As the drama unfolded, the scroll, suspended from poles or 
affixed to a wall, was slowly unrolled, event by event. 

An inscription on the bottom of the scroll reveals that it changed hands 
on November 13, 1644, in the Mahbubnagar district of Telangana. The orig- 
inal inscription, which would perhaps have given the date the painting was 
finished and the name of the artist, has been erased. In recent years, several 



19. 

THE MARKANDEYA AND BHAVANA 
RISHI LEGEND SCROLL 
Andhra Pradesh, probably Mahbubnagar 
district, ca. 1625 

Paint on cloth, 27 ft. 8 in.X 36V4 in. 
(8.45 m. X 92 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.469) 



legend scrolls have been discovered in the region; seven others, painted from 
about 1775 to 1900, are in the Mittal Museum. 1 Until about fifty years ago, 
several painter families lived in the villages and temple towns of Telangana. 
Now only one family paints scrolls. A scroll was completed as recently as 
early 1985. 

Painted scrolls have been used in India to provide religious and ethical edu- 
cation, as well as entertainment, since ancient times. Buddhist, Brahminical, 
and Jain texts dating to centuries before the birth of Christ all contain abun- 
dant references to painted scrolls, or pata-chitras, and in classical Sanskrit 
literature one finds descriptions of yama-patas, scrolls that narrate the jour- 
ney to heaven and the punishments in hell. Indian artists in several parts of 
the country still paint scrolls illustrating local versions of tales from Hindu 
and Jain mythology, but these from Andhra Pradesh are the only scroll paint- 
ings we know of that depict the legends and heroic exploits of the ancestors 
of particular castes. 

The paintings on all of the Telangana scrolls are in a fairly sophisticated 
style that can hardly be termed "folk." It is evident that they were painted 
by the same artists commissioned by the Hindu aristocracy, the powerful 
landlords who fostered Hindu art and culture in the villages of the region. 
None of the scrolls show any sign of the painters' having been influenced by 
the work done at the courts of the Muslims who ruled the predominantly 
Hindu population of this area for more than four hundred years, from 1518 
to 1948. Both the overall effect and many details of the illustrations on this 
scroll reflect the artists' debt to paintings produced for the Hindu rulers of 
Vijayanagar in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The later scrolls owe 
much to the styles evolved in South India under the Nayaks from the late 
sixteenth to the eighteenth century. 

Agile, powerfully limbed heroes and heavenly beings adorned with tow- 
ering crowns and lavish jewelry people these scenes, and the sweep and swing 
of their striped garments and fluttering girdles create the illusion of movement. 
No attempt has been made to model either figures or accessories, but they 
are so well drawn one can almost feel their rounded forms. A firm, vigorous 
outline encloses areas of bright, flat color set against a dominant cinnabar 
red ground, but the line is never allowed to disturb the rich two-dimensional 
texture of the painted surface. The scroll's twenty-two panels are further 
enhanced by a pervasive rhythmic unity. 

J.M. 

1. For other scrolls with the same theme as this one, see: Talwar and Krishna, Indian 
Pigment Painting, pp. 119-20, pis. 133a, 133b, colorplate xn. 



20 



The brilliant drawing in this delightful fragment of a kalamkari (literally, 
worked with a pen) appears to have flowed from the artist in effortless 
strokes. The dashing, spontaneous brush work can be ascribed to the energy 
and expertise acquired over centuries in South Indian textile workshops, 
where unselfconscious craftsmen devoted lifetimes to composing lively, 
crowded scenes like this procession passing a palatial faqadc. At the bottom 
of this section from a hanging that was as large as a bedspread, a princely 
figure stands beneath his royal umbrella holding an elephant goad. Behind 
him is an attendant bearing a chauri (yak-tail fly whisk). Both were proba- 
bly mounted on an elephant, for in front of them is a canopy, along with a 
flying bird and part of a billowing cloth standard. Beyond a painted screen 
eight swaggering, bright-eyed soldiers (and part of another) march dizzily 
along, waving their typically South Indian straight-bladed swords, threaten- 
ing flights of insects with their fly whisks, and gesticulating with broad 
good humor. 

From ancient times, textiles have been one of India's thriving industries. 
If international trade in fabrics developed under the Phoenicians or even 
earlier, India's history as a producer of textiles is surely yet more ancient, as 
is apparent from the apparel represented in Indus Valley works of art, some 
of which imply block printing. Today many villagers wear cottons deco- 
rated with patterns passed down for generations. 

Arab, Persian, Indonesian, and Chinese dealers braved India's coasts 
and rivers, eager to acquire Indian textiles and pepper in exchange for East 
African ivory and gold, South Arabian coffee, Bahrain pearls, Chinese porce- 
lains and silks, Ceylonese cinnamon, Indonesian nutmeg, mace, and cloves, 
Persian silk, wine, and rosewater, or Arab horses. Although the many varie- 
ties of South Indian and Gujarati silks were greatly admired, cotton fabrics 



20. 

FRAGMENT OF A KALAMKARI 
South India, ca. 1660 
Cotton, resist dyed, 20 1 /h X 18% in. 
(51 X 48 cm.) 

Collection Mrs. Krishna Riboud, Paris 



53 



were also in demand and were widely made. Indian expertise in preparing 
fibers to absorb dyes through mordants ( a trade secret), as well as the appeal- 
ing inventiveness of Indian designers, painters, and block printers and their 
eagerness to accommodate special needs, brought Indian cottons well-deserved 
international markets. Block printing was the specialty at Gujarat on the 
west coast; centers on the east coast concentrated on painted cottons. 

The artisans of the Riboud kalamkari fragment worked in a milieu some- 
where between the robust workshops that supplied villagers and those that 
catered to sophisticated court ateliers. The dashingly brushed, densely packed 
figurative composition, although it was influenced by the rapidly changing 
painting styles at Nayak palaces and major temples, suggests that these paint- 
ers were master craftsmen in the urban bazaar. They may on occasion have 
supplied goods for the courts and priests, but we can assume that more often 
they sold their work to well-to-do local clients and perhaps to wholesalers, 
probably including foreigners. 

Published: Varadarajan, "Figurative Kalamkari," pp. 67-70, fig. 161; Gittinger, Master 
Dyers, pp. 121-27, figs. U3, 116. 



21. 

TWO FOLIOS FROM A MANUSCRIPT 
OF THE MAHABHARATA (THE BOOK 
OF WARS) 

Karnataka, probably Seringapatam, dated 1670 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of 
Indian Art, Hyderabad (76.528, 529) 

a. FOREST LANDSCAPE WITH RIVER 
From the Aranyaka Parva (?) 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 1V 2 x 18% in. (19.2 X 45.9 cm.) 
Miniature: AV2 X 6V4 in. (11.3 x 15.8 cm.) 

b. BATTLE SCENE 

From the Drona Parva (folio 280) 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: IV2 X 16 in. (19 X 40.6 cm.) 
Miniature: 4'/« x 6'/h in. (10.4 x 15.5 cm.) 



These two illustrations and the other folios to survive from the same 
Mahabharata manuscript, all painted in a mature, highly sensitive and indi- 
vidual style, provide a basis and direction for the study of South Indian 
miniature painting. 1 The manuscript's colophon page not only bears the 
name of the scribe — Govind Sharma, son of Ratnaker, resident of the village 
of Chalitgram — but also provides a firm date: Samvat 1592, which corre- 
sponds to 1670. Although lavish and extensive paintings still exist on temple 
and palace walls in South India, illustrated manuscripts, either palm leaf or 
paper, dating to before the end of the eighteenth century are extremely rare. 

The manuscript was written and illustrated in Mysore (now the state of 
Karnataka), probably at Seringapatam, which became the capital of the 
Wodeyar dynasty in about 1610 and continued to flourish as a center of art 
and culture under Devaraja Wodeyar, who ruled the kingdom from 1659 to 
1673. The Brahmin for whom the manuscript was produced, one Timmaji 
Pandit (perhaps an important priest or official of the Wodeyars), is depicted 
— by a different artist from the one who illustrated the text — on the chapter 
colophon pages along with a saintly figure identified as Vyasa, the sage who 
is traditionally credited with compiling the Mahabharata. 

The vast collection of myths and legends that make up the Mahabharata 
was probably compiled between 200 B.C. and a.d. 200, although opinions 
vary as to its date and author. The great classical Sanskrit epic contains 
many plots and subplots, but the main theme concerns the struggle between 
two families, the Kauravas and the Pandavas, for control of upper India, 
called Bharata in the poem (whose title translates literally as the Great Bharata 
but which is generally known as The Book of Wars). On the orpiment yel- 
low ground of the pages from this Mahabharata manuscript, the Sanskrit text 
is written in black Devanagari script around the illustrations, and the princi- 
pal characters' names are given above them. 

The first of these two illustrations could be from the Aranyaka Parva 
(Forest Chapter), which narrates the life of the Pandavas during their exile. 
The grove of flowering trees beside a river alive with fish and a crocodile 
could be one of the three forests the Pandavas stayed in: Kamyaka, Dwaitvana, 
or Naimisa. Pure landscapes like this are rare in Indian art, where nearly 
every painting has a figural subject. In the battle scene from the Drona Parva 
(a chapter named after one of the Kaurava war leaders), Ashvatthama, a 
Kaurava, furiously charges two of the Pandava brothers, Bhima and Arjuna. 
The rivals fight with bows and arrows from elaborate gold chariots. 
Ashvatthama's flying banner bears the symbolic face of a lion; Arjuna's 
is decorated with the striding figure of green-bodied Hanuman, the mon- 
key god. 

The stark profiles, beaklike noses, and large oval eyes of these figures, 
as well as their partially frontal poses, betray the painter's debt to the 



54 



21b 



Vijayanagar tradition, but otherwise the Mahabharata illustrations show lit- 
tle affinity with Vijayanagar painting. Though both figures and objects are 
highly stylized, they are charged with great freedom of movement. Em- 
phatic arcs define the contours of the solid, short figures, and the unusual 
modeling and rounded drawing infuses them with superhuman strength and 
vigor. Though the figures are small, even finger- and toenails have been 
meticulously rendered, and the costumes are particularly naturalistic, care- 
fully drawn with full understanding of their folds. 

The painter used only a few intense yet mellow colors, usually against a 
salmon background. Modeling is done in shades darker than the ground 
colors, and highlights are suggested with white or a lighter color. Figures are 
elaborately jeweled and crowned, and there is a profusion of gilding. Instead 
of applying the gold leaf directly to the painted surface, the artist applied it 
first to thin paper, which he then cut into the desired shapes and pasted onto 
the picture, a technique found only in Karnataka paintings. 

J.M. 

1. The folios are dispersed in museums and private collections; for those that are 
published, see: Mittal, Andhra Paintings, fig. 5; Rawson, Indian Art, p. 104; Karanth, 
Karnataka Paintings, pis. 30, 31; Sharma, Indian Miniature Painting, no. 24, pi. 24; 
Czuma, Indian Art, no. 124. 



22 



22. 

A MAN LISTENING TO A VINA PLAYER 
Andhra Pradesh or Tanjore, late 18th century 
Opaque watercolor on cloth, 1PA x XdVi in. 
(30X42 cm.) 
Private collection 



This buxom young musician and her admirer could be stone temple sculp- 
tures flattened into pictorial form. In South India the Great Tradition sur- 
vived far longer, and with greater purity, than was the case at Mughal and 
Rajput courts of northern India, where the traditional mode was submerged, 
or at least cosmetically covered. The picture rings with visual excitement. 
Curving lines, bold stripes, and glowing color convey the forceful rhythms, 
tones, and mood of the music. For Indian viewers, the painting evokes a 
cluster of poetic similes: "eyes like pipal leaves," "breasts full as baskets of 
rice," "bowstrings buzzing like bees." 



Published: Khandalavala and Chandra, Miniatures and Sculptures, p. 24, no. 70. 



56 



The Dasavatara series these two pictures belong to, a sequence of about 
fifteen cotton panels painted on both sides, was originally joined together 
like an accordion. In addition to the ten avatars of Vishnu, the series depicts 
other forms of Vishnu and Krishna, the minor gods Hanuman and Garuda 
(Vishnu's half-human, half-avian vehicle), fashionably dressed bhaktas (dev- 
otees), and naked saints. 1 The series, which comes from Karnataka and was 
probably painted at Seringapatam in the early eighteenth century, is of such 
high quality that it must have been executed for a Mysore ruler or high 
official. The patron may have been one of the prosperous Maratha chiefs 
who settled in Mysore after Bijapur conquered part of the kingdom in the 
1640s and Shivaji became governor of the region. 

At the left, the infant Krishna sucks his toe as he floats on a banyan leaf 
in the cosmic ocean. The theme of this graceful picture is found in the 
Markandeya Purana, in the myth of the sage Markandeya who sees the Cre- 
ator as a small child resting on the branch of a banyan tree in the vastness of 
the primeval sea. On the reverse (not shown here), a bhakta, perhaps 
Markandeya, adores the image of the god Venkatesvara. In the background, 
a sahastradal-kamal (thousand-petaled lotus), a large hamsa (the sacred goose 
that is Brahma's vehicle), and a serpent symbolize the story of the creation 
according to Vaishnavite mythology: as Vishnu lies asleep on the coils of 
Ananta, the cosmic serpent, floating effortlessly in the primeval waters, from 
his navel sprouts a wonderful lotus of a thousand petals in which the Cre- 
ator, Brahma, is seated. 

The scene depicted in the painting at the right is Krishna's slight of 
Indra, king of the gods and lord of the clouds, whose worship Krishna has 
persuaded the cowherds to abandon in tavor of the spirit of Mount Govardhan. 
Incensed, Indra retaliated by sending down torrents of rain. Whereupon 
Krishna, knowing the deluge to be the work of Indra, uprooted the moun- 
tain and held it effortlessly aloft on the tip of his little finger to shelter the 
earth below. The foreground and the rocks on either side of Krishna are 
filled with animals — cows, deer, peacocks, a bear, a leopard, a serpent, and 
an elephant — and the mountaintop holds a sadhu (a Hindu ascetic), a tiger, 
and a hare. In the picture on the reverse (not illustrated), a bearded bhakta or 
mahanta (priest) wearing a red jama, his hands folded in adoration, stands 
beneath an arch decked with flowers. 

The style of the Dasavatara paintings carries on the distinctive tradition 
seen first and at its best in Vishnu Rescuing the King of the Elephants, a large 
painting on cloth (now in the State Museum at Hyderabad and as yet 
unpublished) that has been dated to between 1625 and 1650, and in the 1670 
Mahabharata manuscript (no. 21). The style continues in some twenty-five 
paintings executed in about 1800, 2 and the last phase is represented in a 
manuscript on paper of the tenth chapter of the Bhagavata Purana (Legend of 
the Lord), with seventeen illustrations, that dates to about 1825. 3 The last 
two groups, however, have lost the flamboyance and mood of religious 
absorption found in the earlier paintings. They have become instead mere 
icons, almost incapable of inspiring reverence. 

In the half century that separates the Mahabharata manuscript from these 
paintings, the style changed very little. The figures are no longer stunted, 
and they are larger in scale, but these are portraits of deities, not illustrations 
of a narrative. In most of the Dasavatara paintings, a single figure stands 
under an arch decorated with floral garlands, as if in a shrine, filling almost 
the entire picture space. Some of the gods face front with a hypnotic stare; 
others are shown in stark profile, with their feet twisted sideways, one slightly 
forward, and their bodies in the combined front and side view that harks 
back to late Vijayanagar style. Whereas the figures' bodies are modeled strictly 
according to the formula adopted by the Mahabharata artist, the heavy mod- 
eling on the costumes has been completely discarded, and folds of fabric are 
rendered with a series of lines that suggest the contours of the body beneath. 
The only other change is in the palette. A wider range of colors has been 
used in the Dasavatara series, and they are more vivid than the somber shades 
of the Mahabharata pages. Lapis lazuli rather than indigo covers large areas 
in some of the pictures, an unusual feature not seen in other medieval South 



23. 

TWO FOLIOS FROM A DASAVATARA 
SERIES 

Karnataka, probably Seringapatam, 
early 18th century 

Paint on cotton, lOVs X 6 5 /h in. (25.7 X 16.8 cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.535, 537) 

a. THE INFANT KRISHNA FLOATING ON THE 
COSMIC OCEAN 

b. KRISHNA LIFTS MOUNT GOVARDHAN 



Indian miniatures or wall paintings, and rare even in paintings done at the 
neighboring Muslim courts of the Deccan. 

The artist has fully achieved his purpose, for these paintings, with their 
power-inflated figures and vigorous designs, not only provide aesthetic plea- 
sure but evoke spiritual visions of the deities they portray. The sensuous 
celestial forms, drawn according to the South Indian iconographic canons 
popular since the Vijayanagar period, remind one of Karnataka sculpture. 
Some of the figures are based on the stone images in the Venkatesvara tem- 
ple at Tirupati, in Andhra Pradesh. The god at Tirupati was greatly revered 
by the Vijayanagar and Mysore rulers, as well as by the people of Karnataka. 

j.M. 

1. Seven other paintings from the group are in the Mittal Museum in Hyderabad, 
one is in the collection of Naozar Chenoy of Hyderabad, and another is in the Cleveland 
Museum of Art. The whereabouts of the others is unknown. All the pictures have 
flyleaves with Sanskrit verses written in black Devanagari script. 

2. The paintings are dispersed in several collections. See: Kramrisch, Unknown India, 
no. 119; Spink, Krishnamandala, fig. 21; Indian Painting, no. 89. 

3. See: Doshi, "Illustrated Manuscripts," figs. 2a-d. The manuscript is now in the 
Karnataka Historical Research Society, Hubli-Dharwar. 



24. 

RAVANA AIMS AN ARROW AT RAMA 
Folio from a Ramayana manuscript 
Southern Andhra Pradesh, ca. 1725 
Watercolor on paper, backed with cloth 
Folio: SVh x 5% in. (20.8 X 14.2 cm.) 
Miniature: 7Yh x 5 3 /« in. (18.7 x 13.8 cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.540) 



Wall painting was the favorite means of pictorial expression in South India. 
Although painted miniatures from the area are rare, the best examples com- 
pare favorably with works produced anywhere else in India. This painting, 
executed in southern Andhra Pradesh in the early eighteenth century, may 
once have been part of an incomplete Ramayana manuscript that is now in 
the State Museum, Hyderabad. 1 All of the Ramayana illustrations, which 
have text written above them in small captions in Telegu script, are done on 
handmade European paper backed with cotton cloth. The paintings clearly 
demonstrate that a sophisticated school of Hindu miniature painting existed 
in Andhra Pradesh. 

Although until shortly before these paintings were made most of the 
state had been under the Qutb-Shahi rulers of Golconda and was at the time 
controlled by the nawabs of Carnatic, who were also Muslims, the literature, 
music, and art of the Hindus of Andhra Pradesh reflected their staunch ad- 
herence to the traditions of the Vijayanagar kings. 

Figures, costumes, and ornaments in the miniatures from the Ramayana 
manuscript all follow conventions that the local painters adopted from the 
post- Vijayanagar traditions evolved in the seventeenth century under the 
Nayak rulers of South India. The style is a highly sophisticated one, related 
in some ways to a series of paintings done at Madras for Niccolao Manucci 
between 1701 and 1706, 2 and close as well to the wall paintings, dating to 
about 1625-50 that were discovered recently at Chengam in Tamil Nadu. 3 
Most of the Ramayana paintings are executed in watercolor rather than 
gouache, and the backgrounds are unpainted. The color scheme is somber, 
and gold and silver are altogether absent. The compositions bespeak the 
artist's unique sense of design. 

Like other war scenes from the manuscript, this dramatic depiction of 
multiheaded, multiarmed Ravana, the demon king of Lanka, is imbued with 
tremendous force and energy. Ravana, mounted on a horse-drawn chariot, 
aims an arrow at Rama, who was probably shown on the facing page. Rama's 
arrows fly through the air, wreaking havoc in Ravana's camp. Action and 
mood have been conveyed not so much by facial expression as by posture 
and gesture. The winging arrows and the corpses and severed heads that lie 
scattered in the foreground and draped over the chariot intensify the drama. 
Using but a few colors, relying almost entirely on the power and expressive- 
ness of line, this highly imaginative painter has succeeded in re-creating the 
tension and ferocity of battle. (See also no. 13.) 

J.M. 

1. See: Mittal, Andhra Paintings; and Welch, Indian Drawings, no. 3, which may also 
belong to the manuscript. 

2. Archer, "Company Painting." 

3. Nagaswamy, "Tamil Paintings," p. 117, figs. 11a, lib. 



25 



25. 

PLANE IN THE SHAPE OF A MAKARA 
Andhra Pradesh, ca. 18th century 
Bronze, length 12% in. (32.1cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (83.1) 



This remarkable object, actually a metal plane in the shape of a crouching 
makara (a crocodilian sea monster), is unique. Most planes are made of 
wood (though they may sometimes have a metal plate on the smooth sole), 
and metal planes were rarely used in India by either carpenters or metalsmiths. 
Perhaps our plane was made by a metal caster as a gift for a fellow craftsman. 
The shape is whimsical, but the wide-open mouth, flat sides, and two loops 
on top also make it very functional. Watching thin shavings emerge from 
the makara's mouth as the tool was used to smooth wood or metal must have 
been exciting, especially for the artisan's young sons who were later to learn 
his craft. 

The makara is a symbol of happiness and an auspicious sign, for it is the 
vehicle of several Hindu deities. It takes precedence over all other water 
animals as a motif in Indian art, particularly sculpture, and figures promi- 
nently on panels, torans, medallions, gargoyles, throne backs, and jewelry. 
As in later sculptures, the depiction here is highly conceptual. The makara is 
shown with scanty details, yet there are beaded ornaments on the neck and 
about the hindquarters, and all the parts of the body, the legs in particular, 
have been imaginatively sculpted to achieve the illusion of movement. The 
iron blade and the wooden wedge that held it in place are missing. 

j.M. 



26. 

MANUSCRIPT: GITA GOVINDA (THE 
SONG OF THE COWHERD) OF 
JAYADEVA, WITH THE COMMENTARY 
OF NARAYANADASA (81 folios) 
By Dhananjaya 
Orissa, ca. 1690 

Opaque watercolor on palm leaf, covers of 
wood inlaid with ivory, IV2 X \1% in. 
(3.8x29.5 cm.) 

Orissa State Museum, Bhubaneshwar 



Probably the earliest dated Orissan manuscript, and one of the few surviv- 
ing examples to be signed, this copy of the Gita Govinda (The Song of the 
Cowherd) was written and illustrated by an artist named Dhananjaya in 
about 1690. Like other early books from South India, the manuscript has 
folios made from palm leaves. The leaves were dried, boiled, redried, then 
flattened and burnished with agate or polished shell, and the stack of finished 
pages, trimmed to uniform size and protected between wooden covers, was 
pierced with holes so that the long, narrow book could be bound with cord. 

In the Orissan style, both script and illustrations were cut into the 
smoothed surfaces of the leaves with the pointed end of an iron stylus (the 
knife on the opposite end was used for trimming pages). The artist or scribe 
held the implement stationary with his right hand and moved the leaf be- 
neath it with his left, doubling his control and allowing him to achieve the 
graceful roundness that characterizes Orissan writing and drawing. On many 
manuscripts, the last step was to blacken the incised lines by rubbing soot, 
ground charcoal, or burned cowdung into the grooves; on others, the artist 
added a few accents of yellow, green, or white with a brush. This manuscript, 



62 



enriched with an unusually lavish palette that includes shades of blue and 
red as well as yellow and green, is especially sumptuous. Most of the eighty- 
one folios have incised drawings on both sides, in addition to one or two 
lines of text in Oriya script with commentary above and below, and in some 
cases not only costumes and figures but entire backgrounds have been 
enlivened with color. 

Dhananjaya may have been influenced by Rajput or Mughal pictures, 
for by the late 1600s the Mughal empire was firmly established even in 
Orissa. The Gita Govinda, a lyric love poem composed in the late twelfth 
century by Jayadeva, a court poet at Bengal, is set in the idyllic groves of 
Vrindavan and describes the love of Krishna and Radha. Radha languishes 
when Krishna flirts with the other herdswomen, but in the end she and 
the Blue God (whom Dhananjaya has sometimes painted green, sometimes 
yellow) are reconciled. Though Dhananjaya worked within a tradition of 
set formulas for figures, trees, animals, and even entire compositions, he 
managed to infuse his often monumental designs with imagination, vitality, 
and humor. 

Published: Losty, The Art of the Book, p. 137, no. 114; Sharma and Vatsyayan, Krishna 
(manuscripts), no. 20. 






SB 

u 

9 1 






1 1 




| \\ . V '• \" • v 














27. 

FOLIO FROM AN ARTIST'S 

SKETCHBOOK 

Orissa, 1st quarter of 18th century 

Paint on cotton, 5 X 6 l A in. (12.7 x 15.8 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 

Art, Hyderabad (77.1) 

a. DURGA SLAYING MAHISA, THE BUFFALO 
DEMON (recto) 

b. LOVERS (verso) 



Even the incorporation of Orissa into the Mughal empire in 1592 did little 
to affect the staunch Hindu orthodoxy and conservatism of the population. 
Like its architects, musicians, poets, and sculptors, the painters of this re- 
mote region of eastern India evolved their own styles and techniques. Tradi- 
tion bound, rigidly adhering to age-old conventions for depicting figures 
and ornament, the work of Orissan artists is difficult to date. Based on the 
color scheme, certain details of costume and jewelry, and the overall vitality 
of the two paintings on this cloth page from an artist's sketchbook, we have 
attributed it to the first quarter of the eighteenth century. 

The painters who lived in villages outside the Orissan seacoast town of 
Puri catered to the demands of both the court and the masses. The same 
artists who were hired by wealthy patrons to create technically sophisticated 
illustrations for palm-leaf or paper manuscripts and fine murals for the walls 
of shrines or palaces also produced brilliantly colored, quickly worked cloth 
paintings called patas to sell in the bazaar. Large numbers of patas depicting 
either Hindu deities or the great shrine of Jagannath (Lord of the Worlds, a 
form of Krishna) at Puri were sold as mementos to the pilgrims who flocked 
to the city. In sketchbooks much like the one this page must have come 



64 




27 b 



from, the painters kept iconographic drawings of the important Hindu gods 
in their various forms as well as sketches for both wall paintings and patas. 
The sketchbooks were used not only as aides-memoire but for training ap- 
prentice artists, and they were also shown to clients, who could leaf through 
the drawings to select themes and images. 

On the front of this page an eight-armed image of the Great Goddess 
Durga, elegant but powerful, her ponderous yet shapely limbs emanating 
strength, slays Mahisa, the buffalo demon. Durga Mahisasuramardini (She 
Who Crushes Mahisa; see also no. 65) was, and is still, a favorite subject of 
sculptors and painters in Bengal and Orissa. This artist's rhythmic drawing, 
well composed, sparingly colored, rendered with the assured, angular lines 
that are a hallmark of Orissan painting, is among the most convincing por- 
trayals of the goddess as envisioned by the people of eastern India. In the 
picture on the reverse, a man and a woman make love. The coy, contempla- 
tive girl who sits at the right could be a servant or may be the same woman 
before the arrival of her lover. The gently flowing lines give the drawing 
a lyrical quality, and a few symbolic, suggestive colors enhance the roman- 
tic mood. 

J.M. 



65 



28. 

A PROCESSION OF HOLY MEN 

Orissa, perhaps Buguda district, 

probably 18th century 

Tinted drawing on paper, 7 3 /t X IW2 in, 

(19.7x29.2 cm.) 

Asutosh Museum of Indian Art, 

University of Calcutta 



Touched with the elegant grotcsqueness and sinuous curvilinearism that 
characterize Orissan art, this drawing, like the wall paintings depicting epi- 
sodes from the Ramayana in the Viranchi-Narayana temple at Buguda, is 
done in a style that is close to the traditional painting of South India. 1 Work- 
ing with a brush on paper, which allowed him far greater freedom than 
stylus on palm leaf, the chitrakara (a member of the painter caste) who 
sketched this delightful procession of Indian ascetics or holy men, called 
sadhus, has noted every detail of toilette, gesture, and personality, from the 
dour concentration of the leader thumping his tambourine to the militancy, 
inspired fervor, or sweet devotion of the others. Marching to the rhythm of 
drum and handbells, the sadhus file past, wearing little more than orna- 
ments, tilakas (caste marks), and licks of ash, their remarkable lengths of 
hair braided, curled, pomaded with ash or ghee, or shaped into Shaivite 
protrusions. 

There were sadhus in India even in pre- Aryan times. Today most of 
these antinomian nomads are devotees of popular Hindu beliefs, albeit in 
their more extreme forms, and, like the rest of Indian society, they have 
absorbed elements from other cultures and religions. Most shun material 
possessions: a sadhu is likely to carry only a shroud, a danda (staff), an 
achal (a short crutch used to support the chin while one meditates), prayer 
beads, a fan to ward off evil spirits, a water pot, a drinking vessel (sometimes 
a human skull), and a begging bowl. 



1. For the wall paintings at Buguda, see: Fischer, Mahapatra, and Pathy, Orissa Kunst, 
pis. 459, 460, 567-73; Das, Puri Paintings, pi. 4. 





Rarely has the sacred eroticism of Jayadeva's Gita Govinda (The Song of the 
Cowherd) been more ecstatically illustrated than in these four unfinished 
pictures, painted on both sides of a pair of folios from an artist's sketchbook. 
The enchanted, willowy herdswomen of Vrindavan, high-stepping deer, 
melodiously chirping birds, buzzing dragonflies, peacocks symbolic of Lord 
Krishna, and, in the final composition, the passionate Blue God himself 
celebrate divine love in flowery bowers by the banks of the Jamuna. The 
lissome, graceful gopis, their long hair in braids, amble, sit, or stand, with 
their oddly reticent backward lean, and chat in a world of expectant reverie 
made all the more mysterious because the artist never dotted in the pupils of 
their eyes. The artist's handling of the brush suggests that he may have been 
a painter of murals. He began gently, his brush touching the sized and bur- 
nished paper with the agility of an alighting bird, leaving faint, deft strokes 
of tan and orange-brown. Gradually, as his inner visualization clarified and 
the pictures emerged, he added greens, reds, and blues to the palette, which 



29. 

TWO FOLIOS FROM AN ARTIST'S 
SKETCHBOOK 

Orissa, perhaps 18th or 19th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 7 3 /k X \ PA in. 
(18.7X29.9 cm.) 
Asutosh Museum of Indian Art, 
University of Calcutta (T.284) 

a. FIVE GOPIS IN AN ARBOR (recto) 

b. SEVEN GOPIS SEATED BY THE RIVERBANK 

(verso) 

C. SIX MAIDENS BY THE FULL MOON (recto) 
d. THE LOVE OF KRISHNA (verso) 



Overleaf, 29d t> 



29c 



he then highlighted in lively white. In flickering, painterly strokes that re- 
semble densely intertwining, curling tendrils, he built up tremulous, ani- 
mated banks or clusters of forms. Flowering vines so profuse they seem to 
burst forth from the page echo the ecstasy of Krishna and Radha. The fer- 
vent mood of bhakti, all-consuming devotion, permeates these sketches; 
every living thing seems to move as though aware of Krishna's immanence. 

Published: 

a. The Art of India and Pakistan, pp. 101-2, 182, no. 865, pi. 80; Barrett and Gray, 
Painting of India, pp. 73-75; Das, Puri Paintings, pp. 169-70, pi. 27. 
c. Ghosh, "Orissan Paintings," p. 197, pi. xiv facing p. 114; Barrett and Gray, Paint- 
ing of India, pp. 73-75; Chaitanya, A History of Indian Painting, p. 23, pi. 18; Banerjee, 
The Life of Krishna, fig. 130. 



30. 

LOTA 

Probably Uttar Pradesh, 17th century or earlier 
Tinned bronze, diameter 6 3 A in. (17 cm.) 
Private collection 



The sections of this lota, as wide as it is tall and resembling a ridged fruit, 
relate to one another like the beats of an Indian drum. The shapes of lotas 
have changed hardly at all since the first millennium; this one, a particularly 
excellent example, was probably made in the seventeenth century. The ves- 
sel fits the hand, and even when wet it is not slippery. Over the years, used 
daily for pouring drinking water, for baths, and for ritual ablutions, it has 
softened to the touch. 



30 



31a, detail 



Jainism has its roots m concepts developed in India some three millennia 
ago. Jains share with Hindus and Buddhists a view of life as a unity, a 
continuum of generation and regeneration in which the most minute crea- 
ture is capable of evolution; their devotion to ahimsa (nonviolence) is per- 
haps the ultimate expression of that belief. So as not to harm even air-borne 
microorganisms with the force of their breath, Jain monks and nuns cover 
their faces with gauze. Jain means descendant of jinas (conquerors), the 
epithet given to the twenty-four great Jain teachers, or tirthankaras, who 
conquered all passions and attained liberation, or nirvana. Vardhamana, known 
as Mahavira (Great Hero), the twenty-fourth tirthankara, was a contempo- 
rary of the Buddha in the sixth century B.C. When he was thirty, Mahavira 
renounced his wealth and took up the life of an itinerant monk. After thir- 
teen years of asceticism and sacrifice, he became a jina, and for the next 
thirty years he traveled the Gangetic kingdoms teaching the doctrines of the 
twenty-three saints who had preceded him. Mahavira is believed to have 
died from self-starvation at Pava, near Rajgir in northeastern India. 

The lives of the tirthankaras and the legends that surround them are 
recounted in the Kalpasutra, the Book of Ritual of the Shvetambaras (White- 
robed Ones), the Jain sect that was once separate from the more austere 
Digambaras (Sky-clad Ones), who eschewed even clothing. Traditionally 
ascribed to the sage Bhadrabahu and compiled in about 300 B.C., the Kalpasutra 
also gives rules for monks and records the succession lists of the Jain pontiffs. 

These three folios belong to a Kalpasutra manuscript so close in style to 
one written and illustrated at Mandu, in Central India, in 1439 that there is 
little doubt it was produced there as well, at about the same time. 1 The 
manuscript's seventy-four paper folios have text on both sides, written in 
gold Nagari script on a colored ground and arranged in double columns. 
Twenty-eight of the pages have an illustration on one side; one page, the 
last, obviously a replacement, has miniatures on both sides in a style associ- 
ated with early nineteenth-century Jodhpur painting. 

The painting on folio 28, the first of those shown here, depicts the 
lustration of the infant Mahavira. On the night the tirthankara was born, 
Indra, lord of the heavens, called Shakra (the Potent One), lulled Mahavira's 
mother into a deep slumber with a charm and took the child from her, 
placing a substitute by her side. Indra multiplied himself fivefold, and the 
five gods carried the baby to Mount Meru, where they anointed him with 
marvelous unctions. Here one Indra, flanked by two others bearing pitchers, 
holds Mahavira on his lap. The peaks of Mount Meru, the mythical abode 
of the gods, rise at the bottom of the picture, and at the top are two bulls, 
apparently two of the four crystal bulls Shakra created to stand at the four 



31. 

THREE FOLIOS FROM A KALPASUTRA 
(THE BOOK OF RITUAL) MANUSCRIPT 
Madhya Pradesh, Mandu, ca. 1440 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 4 X 9 7 /h in. 
(10.2 x 25 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.816) 

a. MAHAVIRA ON MOUNT MERU (folio 28v) 

b. MAHAVIRA CARRIED ON A PALANQUIN 

(folio 33r) 

C. MARUDEVI, ON AN ELEPHANT, ON HER 
WAY TO MEET RISHABHA (folio 52v) 



■ — -_ - -i n — * — — - • 





2? 



31a 



points of the compass. The episode illustrated on folio 33 marks the start of 
Mahavira's years as an ascetic. When Mahavira perceived that the time for 
his renunciation had come, he distributed his possessions. Seeing his 
preparations, the gods descended to his home, where Shakra created a divine 
throne and placed Mahavira upon it. He bathed Mahavira with pure water 
and precious oils, robed him in the lightest of figured muslins, and adorned 
him with garlands of pearls and gems. After fasting for three days, Mahavira 
took his seat in a splendid palanquin called chandraprabha (moon radiance), 
another of Shakra's magical creations. The illustration shows Mahavira being 
carried swiftly to the park where he will obtain diksha, or be initiated. Gods 
bear the front of the palanquin, men the back, and Shakra stands behind 
Mahavira waving a fly whisk. 

Other Kalpasutra manuscripts depict Shakra as a four-armed god, not 
the very human king he has become here, and that the artist has included the 
scene showing Marudevi mounted on an elephant (folio 52) is equally unusual. 
These are only two of the iconographic peculiarities this manuscript has in 
common with the 1439 Kalpasutra, which Jeremiah Losty concludes was 
illustrated by an artist who "was obviously not a Jaina, nor did he have 
access to a standard illustrated version of the text." 2 

Filled with grief at the thought of her son Rishabha's suffering as an 
ascetic, Marudevi wept herself blind. When Rishabha attained enlightenment, 
he sent his son Bharata to bring Marudevi to him, and in the painting on 
folio 52 she rides to meet the tirthankara, an offering in each hand. Bharata, 
holding a chhattar (umbrella), sits behind her. In the presence of Rishabha, 
Marudevi's blindness vanished, washed away by tears of joy. She immediately 
died and achieved salvation, for her spiritual blindness had vanished as well. 

Most Jain manuscripts were produced in western India, chiefly in Gujarat, 
where prosperous Jain merchants and shipbuilders filled whole libraries with 
copies of the sacred texts. But this Kalpasutra and the few other fifteenth- 
century manuscripts to survive from centers outside western India were also 
clearly executed by first-rate calligraphers and artists hired by wealthy patrons. 3 
For several decades after paper and blue pigment were imported to India 
from Iran in about the mid-1300s, artists in western India, no longer ham- 
pered by the difficulties of working on a palm-leaf surface or limited to the 
leaves' thin horizontal format, made steady improvements in design, drafts- 
manship, and painting techniques. As demand grew, however, and paper 
manuscripts were produced in greater numbers, the work became stereotyped, 



72 



igpjoa"asT fepis^^(Si^ijra«*nfe*''»" 




31b 



the execution rougher. These illustrations, with their vitality, wider range of 
colors, and beautifully rendered contemporary textiles and furniture — all 
very different from what was being done in Gujarat at the time — prove that 
it was creative painters at places like Mandu who kept the best strains of 
Western Indian painting alive. 

J.M. 

1. See: Chandra, "Notes"; Khandalavala and Chandra, "A Consideration"; Khanda- 
lavala and Chandra, "New Documents of Indian Painting," pp. 17-22, figs. 9-19. 

2. Losty, The Art of the Book, p. 60. 

3. In addition to the 1439 Mandu Kalpasutra (see notes 1 and 2), this rare group of 
manuscripts includes a Kalakacharyakatha from Mandu; folios (now in the Los Ange- 
les County Museum) from a Kalpasutra also produced at Mandu; and a Kalpasutra 
from Jaunpur dating to 1465. See: Chandra, "A Unique Kalakacharyakatha Ms."; 
Chandra and Ehnbom, The Cleveland Tuti-nama, nos. 6-8; Khandalavala and Chandra, 
"An Illustrated Kalpasutra." 




31c, detail 



Overleaf, Members of the Naga tribe. Unidentified photogra- 
pher, 1860s. Albumen print, 8'/ 2 X l()>/ 2 in. (20.6 X 26.7 cm.). 
Collection Howard and Jane Ricketts, London 



II. TRIBE 




AND VILLAGE 




The Nagas (see photograph, pages 75-76), noted for their fierce indepen- 
dence, their courage as warriors, their talent as dancers and musicians, and 
their artistry, lived until quite recently as slash-and-burn (swidden) agricul- 
turists in the jungle-covered hills of northeastern India between Assam and 
Burma. Together with other Indian aboriginals, they have had a reputation 
for being wild and unapproachable, a reputation strengthened by their "ec- 
centric" dress and their headhunting practices. In Mughal paintings such 
people are depicted as ferocious hunters dressed in leaves, "bogeymen" with 
whom to frighten ill-behaved children. 

Intended to be worn by a Naga warrior in a heroic dance, this splendid 
headgear should be seen in stately but turbulent motion, with feathers spinning, 
brass disk flashing, and black hair flying in the breeze. Traditionally, hornbill 
feathers could be worn only by warriors who had taken a human head, an 
act deemed essential in the life of a young male Naga (in recent times monkey 
heads have been substituted). 

Prior to British and Indian government influence, the wearing of hornbill 
feathers was the prerogative of warriors, who were permitted one feather 
for each head taken — up to five, after which feathers could be added 
for each corpse touched in war. Other sumptuary laws concerning dress and 
ornament were related to the practice of headhunting. Only warriors who 
had taken heads were allowed to wear certain types of shawls or to bear 
distinctive tattoos, and only they could wear brass or wooden trophy masks 
(see nos. 33, 34). 



32. 

FEATHERED HEADDRESS 
Nagaland, perhaps Angami tribe, 19th century 
Hornbill feathers, brass, human and goat hair, 
Job's tears, unidentified red seeds, wood, basket- 
work, cotton thread, and copper wire, with 
recent Naga repairs in pink thread, 54->4 X 25 5 /8 in. 
(139.1 X65.1 cm.) 
Private collection 



The most striking adornments of Naga warriors are miniature tro- 
phy masks symbolic of their prowess as headhunters — worn singly or in 
groups of two or more, mounted as pendants on necklaces. According to 
Naga belief, the human soul is divided into two parts, known in the Wanchu 
dialect as yaha (the animated aspect) and mio (the spiritual aspect). When a 
Naga dies, the yaha travels to the land of the dead while the mio remains in 
the village. Abundant mio is considered beneficial to the prosperity and fer- 
tility of the Nagas and their crops, and Nagas zealously preserve the supply 
of mio in their village. When someone dies incantations are recited lest the 
mio wander off into the forest, and throughout the year ritual hospitality is 
lavished upon ancestors to insure that their spiritual force remains content- 
edly at home. In the past, because Nagas believed that mio resided in the 
head, the spirit reservoir of the village was augmented by the taking of 
heads. When a head was brought into a Naga village, the spirit of the slain 
victim was ritually told that although his relatives no longer cared for him, 
he should feel welcome among his new friends. In the same vein, during 
headhunting forays Naga warriors would cut off and carry away heads of 
dead comrades lest they fall into rival hands and thus increase the mio of an 
enemy village. 

Inasmuch as trophy heads represented the village's wealth, they were 
displayed with pride. Skulls were (and still are) stacked like books on a shelf 
in the village morungs (longhouses where young boys lived), and it was not 
uncommon for a morung to have 150 skulls. Because the Naga morungs 
were made of wood, bamboo, and thatch, fires often destroyed these all- 
powerful inventories, and the Nagas would lovingly carve substitutes (see 
no. 34) that were deemed as spiritually efficacious as the originals. Minia- 
ture replicas of heads, such as the one illustrated here, were similarly imbued 
with mio, assuring the wearer of health, fertility, prosperity, and success in 
hunting. 

Poignantly expressive as a Kathe Kollwitz self-portrait, the present ex- 
ample is by far the earliest and most moving Naga brass trophy mask we have 
seen. Unlike later trophy masks, it is a wholly convincing portrait, the reduced 
simulacrum of a real face, modeled in wax and cast by the cire perdue meth- 
od (see no. 51). It is possible with one's fingers and thumbs to experience the 
modeling of the wax, to feel as the sculptor did the contours of bony struc- 



33. 

BRASS TROPHY MASK 

Nagaland or Tirap district of Arunachal 

Pradesh, Wanchu Naga tribe, 

perhaps 17th century 

Cast and chased brass, repaired with plates of 
brass, fibers, and wire; suspended on a necklace 
of tubular orange glass beads, height 2 7 /h in. 
(7.3 cm.); necklace, length 23 3 /4 in. (60.2 cm.) 
Private collection 



ture, nose, and mouth, and to trace his skillful incision of the tattoos. With 
sensitivity and conviction, the village artist conveys violence and transcen- 
dence simultaneously, achieving a work of art that can be compared, in its 
universality, with another reflection on man's mortality, the portrait of the 
dying Mughal courtier c Inayat Khan (no. 149). 

Trophy masks were handed down from one generation to another; here 
the metal has been worn through by frequent use. Much revered, the mask 
was ingeniously and carefully repaired with small, irregularly shaped plates 
of brass attached by village-made copper and steel wire and by sinewy 
bamboo(?) fibers. 



Unlike the brass mask (no. 33), which probably was commissioned 
by a Naga from a Nagaized but non-Naga village brassworker, these wooden 
masks were carved by Nagas, perhaps by the warriors who had taken the 
heads they represent. From these pendants much can be learned about the 
ethnic background of the Nagas, an Indo-Mongoloid group that, it is believed, 
incorporates elements of the Mongoloids, the proto-Australoids, and the 
Negritos. Because the Nagas are a preliterate people whose history has been 
largely ignored by archaeologists, the question of how these groups came 
together remains unanswered. Origin myths are contradictory. Some Nagas 
claim to have come from the south by way of the Bay of Bengal; others say 
they arrived from Burma, to the east; and still others argue a northern origin. 
Perhaps there are elements of truth in all these myths, and the Nagas as we 
know them arrived from various places. It is also possible that they are 
descended from the stock that spawned another isolated highland headhunting 
society of Southeast Asia — the Ifugao of the Philippines. So similar are some 
of their customs and beliefs, their appearances, and their extremely chaste art 
styles — quite unlike the ornate idioms of neighboring peoples — that one 
senses a common heritage. 

The sculptors of these trophy masks captured not only the physical ap- 
pearance of their fallen foes, but — like Indian portrait painters — their spirits 
as well. One characterization is clownishly rambunctious, another dourly 
warlike, and the Janus-like pair seem gentle and serene. To increase spiritual 
power, the sculptors inserted strands of human hair into these masks, con- 
verting them into anthropomorphic reliquaries. 



34. 

THREE WOODEN TROPHY MASKS 
Nagaland or Tirap district of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Wanchu and Konyak Naga tribes, 
19th century 

Average height 2 7 /s in. (7.3 cm.) 
Private collection 






79 



35b 



35. 

TWO PAIRS OF BRACELETS AND 
BANGLES 

a. PAIR OF MASSIVE IVORY BRACELETS FOR THE 
UPPER ARM 

Nagaland, Naga tribe, 18th— 19th century 
Height 5 7 /s in. (14.9 cm.), diameter 4V 2 in. 
(11.4 cm.) 

The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 

b. PAIR OF CAST AND ENGRAVED BRASS 
BANGLES 

Nagaland, Naga tribe, early 19th century 
Height 2Vz in. (6.4 cm.) 
Private collection 



Tribal brass or ivory bangles are often more impressive, and more 
beautiful, than court jewels, however many rubies, emeralds, or diamonds 
the latter might contain. A pair of Naga bracelets for the upper arm exempli- 
fies potent elegance to a degree not seen in Mughal or Rajput equivalents. 
Sawed from the wide end of a tusk, then shaped and stained to bring out the 
superb grain of the ivory and rubbed for lifetimes against the wearers' skins 
until the inner edges took on a jewellike transparency, they endowed their 
warrior owners with regal authority. 

Also Naga are a pair of bracelets of very heavy cast and engraved brass, 
lined inside with lac, presumably to buffer the skin. Their Noguchi-like 
masses are as impressive sculpturally as they must have been serviceable in 
a brawl. 



Young Nagas of both sexes enjoyed colorful ornaments, which were 
traditionally worn with appealing flourish. They adapted unpromising for- 
eign objects to their own use with admirable inventiveness and taste. Bro- 
ken tumblers of thick glass were ground down into ear ornaments; and 
necklaces such as these, of colorful glass trade beads, were strung on cords 
of local fibers fastened by British Indian coins. Swathed in several twisted 
strands of these indigo, orange, and purplish beads, which blend harmoniously 
with traditional ornaments, a Naga village belle brings to mind the magnificent 
women of ancient Indian sculpture, who wore comparably simple, power- 
fully massed forms. 



36. 

GLASS BEAD NECKLACES 
Nagaland, late 19th century 
Average length of strand 22 l A in. (56.5 cm.) 
Private collection 




81 





37 



Traditional Indians, tribal or otherwise, often go to nature for their raw 
materials. Feathers — ephemera radiant as jewels — delighted the Nagas as 
much as they did maharajas (see no. 184), and one can scarcely imagine more 
eye-catching ornaments than these. To preserve their jungle freshness, a spe- 
cial wooden box, almost as pleasing as the ear ornaments, was made for them. 

Shells from the sea have always been valued by the Nagas, perhaps in 
remembrance of a distant past lived by the Bay of Bengal. Nagas have used 
them to make ornaments, occasionally commissioning brassworkers to cast 
their forms in metal. This ear ornament, one of a pair, was shaped from the 
center of a shell, smoothed, and then incised with a human figure, probably 
representing a defeated enemy. As with so many Naga objects, its exquisite 
proportions, line, and surface have gained soft lustrousness from handling. 
The ghostly but lively stick figure also appears as a motif in cowrie shell 
sewn on black cloth and as a tattoo on the chests of warriors. 



The Ramayana (see no. 13) describes an almost mythical non-Aryan people 
— perhaps the ancestors of the present-day Nagas — who inhabited the hilly 
jungle tracts of northeastern India as terrible tiger-men, with hair done up in 
pointed topknots. The description brings to mind the wooden hair ornament 
shown here. Smoked black and much rubbed by use, it was skewered through 
a warrior's topknot. Trophy heads at each end, to which feathers were once 
attached, reminded onlookers of the wearer's brave deeds. The carved faces 



82 



37. 

EAR ORNAMENTS 

Manipur, Koboi Naga tribe, ca. 1900 

Feathers, bark, wool, and hemp fiber, 

diameter 4V2in. (11.5 cm.) 

National Museum, New Delhi (64.1541) 



38. 

EAR ORNAMENT 

Nagaland, Phom or Chang Naga tribe, 

late 19th century 

Shell, bamboo, string, and glass(?) bead, 
2 7 /8X2 1 / 4 in. (7.2x5.8 cm.) 
Private collection 



39. 

WOODEN HAIR ORNAMENT WITH 
TROPHY MASKS 

Nagaland, Konyak Naga tribe, 19th century 
Length \3 l 6 in. (34.4 cm.) 
Private collection 



38 




39 



with their sharp-edged, harmoniously abstract forms are markedly Oceanian 
in style. They appear to be calling out — or, perhaps, ecstatically releasing 
mio to their new friends (see no. 33). 



This boldly simplified representation of a warrior wears on his chest two 
trophy masks and at his waist a belt, on the back of which are attached seven 
skulls on a belt plate. His hair ornament is of the same basic shape as no. 39. 
Apparently a commemorative portrait of a village hero, the sculpture prob- 
ably stood in a boys' morung, where it was protected from the elements. 
Originally, the figure carried a dao in the right hand, which is carved to 
grasp it. Like the small trophy masks of wood (no. 34), it is a truthful 
likeness with individualized features, carved by a Naga who may have known 
the admired personage he portrayed. The warrior's gaze is intense and 
arresting, and one seems to hear his call. 

Published: Barbier, Art of Nagaland, pp. 82-83, nos. 50, 51. 



40. 

WARRIOR 

Nagaland or Tirap district of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Wanchu or Konyak Naga tribe, 
date unknown 

Carved wood inlaid with shell and bone, human 
or goat hair, feathers, and black pigment, 
height 25% in. (65 cm.) 
Musee Barbier-Muller, Geneva (2503-28) 



83 



Members of the Toda tribe. Photograph by Samuel Bourne, 
1860s. Albumen print, Wi X ll'A in. (23.4 X 28.7 cm.). Collection 
Howard and Jane Ricketts, London 



It has been said that tribal Todas — who are thought to be of Aryan descent 
— live and dream cattle. Their principal form of wealth has been their buffalo 
herds, and their religion centers on cattle and dairies; dairymen serve as the 
priests, and most rituals are associated with their animals. The Toda diet is 
lactovegetarian, and although cattle are sacrificed on the occasion of family 
deaths and rites of passage, as well as at frequent festivals, the corpses of the 
animals are given over to members of the neighboring Kota tribe, who 
either feast upon them or sell the meat at the nearby hill station, Ootaca- 
mund, or "Ooty" (Udagamandalam). 

In return for the buffalo meat, Kota tribesmen traditionally provided 
services to the Todas, with whom in many ways they lived symbiotically. 
Without Kota musicians, Toda celebrations would have been silent affairs; 
and without Kota metalworkers, the Todas would have had to purchase 
many tools from more distant markets. Kota jewelers also made the brass, 
silver, and gold ornaments worn by Todas of both sexes. 

This caparison for a sacrificial buffalo is of Kota manufacture, given 
perhaps in exchange for a Toda buffalo, or — considering its weight and 
workmanship — several buffaloes. It is composed of three massive flowers 
of cowrie shells sewn onto roundels of black cotton cloth fitted over an 
armature of wickerwork, weighty polygonal silver and gold beads strung 
on ropelike cotton, and silver pendants suspended on silver chains from the 
cowrie-shell disks. A large silver and gilded silver pendant hangs from the 
smaller flower, the only one of the three with cowries on both sides. No 
photographs showing such trappings in use have been found, perhaps because 
of the sanctity of the occasions on which they were used. It is believed, 
however, that the necklacelike rope, with its silver and gold beads, silver 
pendant, and smaller cowrie-shell disk hung in the form of a triangle — said 
to symbolize the Mother Goddess Thekkis — between the sacrificial animal's 
forelegs, and that the larger disks were attached to its horns. 



41. 

TRAPPINGS FOR A SACRIFICIAL 
BUFFALO 

Tamil Nadu, Nilgiri Hills, Kota tribe, ca. 1875 
Silver, gold, cowrie shells, black cotton thread, 
and cloth; larger disks, diameter I6V2 in. 
(42 cm.); smaller disk, diameter IOV2 in. 
(26.7 cm.); length of necklace 8 ft. 6 in. 
(2.59 m.); weight 30 lbs. 
Private collection 



85 



42, front 



42, back 



Composed of thin sheets of gold and a tube of silver, through which it was 
suspended, this appealingly geometric object is designed in the form of a 
stylized buffalo mask. The back is decorated with a repousse tree of life 
motif based either on the sacred tudr or kias tree or on kakar grass, wor- 
shiped by the Todas. According to Rivers, whose anthropological study of 
the Toda tribe published in 1906 remains definitive, kakar promoted speedy 
delivery at childbirth, and was used by young girls to sweep the threshold 
of the sacred dairy at the time of the migration ceremony. 1 

Ornaments were used by the Todas at the most important occasions 
and rites of passage. After a dairyman had held office for eighteen years, his 
long celibacy was ended in a special ceremony. It was essential that the young 
woman who participated in the ceremony be finely clothed and adorned 
with ornaments before the rite could be celebrated. 2 

Ornaments were also brought out when a Toda was close to death, at 
which time he was dressed in all the household jewelry. If he recovered, he 
was entitled to sport the family ornaments for the rest of his life (or, one 
suspects, until he tired of wearing them). 3 And before they were burned, 
corpses were similarly adorned. (The jewels were removed a moment before 
the pyre was ignited.) 

When Rivers visited the Todas at the turn of the century he observed, 
"Formerly, gold ornaments seem to have been commonly worn, and so far 
as one can judge from older accounts and illustrations, it seems that Toda 
jewellery has greatly degenerated." 4 From the inventiveness and sensitivity 
of design, we ascribe this pendant to the late nineteenth century. Like the 
trappings for a sacrificial buffalo (no. 41), this object is in harmony with the 
stately arched houses of the dignified Todas (sec photograph, page 85). 



1. Rivers, The Todas, 

2. Ibid., p. 103. 

3. Ibid., pp. 341-42. 

4. Ibid., p. 579. 



435. 



42. 

GOLD PENDANT IN THE FORM OF A 

BUFFALO MASK 

Tamil Nadu, Nilgiri Hills, Kota tribe, 

late 19th century 

VAxVnm. (4.7x2.2 cm.) 

Private collection 



The Konds are a Dravidian people, originally from the coast of eastern 
India, forced by the Aryan invaders into the wild and remote upper hill 
tracts ot the Eastern Ghats, where the rivers were unnavigable and had 
a tendency to flood as high as twenty feet, often without warning. The 
climate, too, was brutal, with temperatures ranging from over 100 degrees 
Fahrenheit in the shade to below freezing. Even today, this area has few 
roads and most of it can be traveled only by footpaths. 



43. 

GROUP OF BRONZE FIGURES, BIRDS, 

AND ANIMALS 

Orissa, Kutiya Kond tribe, ca. 1900 

Maximum height 12 in. (30.5 cm.), 

minimum height 1 5 /k in. (4 cm.) 

Victoria and Albert Museum, London 



<41 



Overleaf, 43 \> 



The Hill Konds, or Maliah Konds, preserved their ancient culture 
— including their language, Kui, which is related grammatically to Tclcgu, 
Tamil, and Kanarese — through the centuries. Although their inaccessible 
land protected them from acculturation, it brought other hazards. Wild 
boars ravaged root crops; jackals, hyenas, and leopards threatened their goats 
and cattle; and bears occasionally attacked villagers, ripping their scalps, 
gouging their eyes, and inflicting wounds that too often festered into blood 
poisoning. Elephants, tigers, and cobras and kraits were also dangerous, but 
worst of all were the malarial mosquitoes. It is no wonder that the Aryans 
left these lands to them; nor is it surprising that the Konds gained a reputa- 
tion for independence to the point of intractability. 

In the mid-nineteenth century, the British were astonished to learn that 
the Konds practiced human sacrifice on a massive scale, presumably to pro- 
pitiate the gods and invoke their blessings. With considerable difficulty, a 
few dedicated civil servants, backed up by soldiery, persuaded the tribal 
people to substitute animals for human beings. 

The fancifully engaging bronzes shown here fall into two groups: those 
representing peacocks, which are believed to have been used in connection 
with the sacrificial rites, and those which are totemic in nature. Kept on 
altars inside family houses, they were important items for dowries. As was 
usually the case in tribal India, bronze casting and other metalwork was not 
done by the tribal people themselves but was commissioned from neighboring 
villagers, who served in this capacity from generation to generation. 

Published: Kramrisch, Unknown India, p. 60. 



44. 

MASK 

Rajasthan, Bhil tribe, ca. 1800 
Polychromed wood inlaid with mirror 
fragments, 8V 4 X S 3 A in. (22.3 x 22.3 cm.) 
Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 
(M. 470/78) 



According to legend, the god Mahadeva was reclining in the forest one 
day when a beautiful damsel appeared, the very sight of whom eased his 
pain. Many children were born to the couple, and one of them was excep- 
tionally ugly and disagreeable. He killed Mahadeva's favorite bull and was 
exiled to the mountains. His descendants are the Bhils, once known as "the 
thieves of Mahadeva." 





90 



45\> 



Today the Bhils are thought to be descended from the Dravidian race, 
driven from their lands by the Aryan Rajputs. Although many Bhils now 
live in towns and cities and have taken on urban life styles, traditional mem- 
bers of the community still celebrate their dramatic festivals and worship 
Mataji and Devi under the guidance of their priests. It is still essential that 
the Bhils, as the former lords of the land, give the ceremonial tika, a mark 
of blessing on the forehead, to certain Rajput princes. 

This mask was worn by a Bhil at a traditional festival, where it might 
have portrayed the warrior saint Gugaji; the Bhils, however, are widespread 
in Rajasthan, and their deities probably differ from one branch of the tribe 
to the next. 



Created to satisfy the curiosity of foreigners and their eternal itch for 45. 

souvenirs, this artfully sculptured slice of life transports us to Bengal to A VILLAGE MARKET 

explore a timeless Indian scene. Most of India is rural; and most Indians, Bengal, Calcutta area, Krishnaghur, ca. 1875 

including those of tribal background, live m villages, work the soil, or tend Polychromed pottery, wood, thatch, and cloth, 

. . 13 x 3^ x 32 in (33 x 81 3 x 81 3 cm N 

herds. Wherever they live, whatever their religion, caste or subcaste (if in- „ CI " fr i 

... .... n\ i • i reabody Museum or Salem (E/o/6) 

deed they are within the caste system at all), and social or economic lot, their 

lives are influenced profoundly by the seasons. A Bengali glancing at this 
photographically accurate village market could tell from the fruits and vege- 
tables the season or even the week represented. 

Not usually accepted as "art," such objects are known to have been 
made as early as 1821, when James B. Briggs began to collect the five life- 
sized examples "copied from nature by a distinguished native artist of Calcutta" 
that he gave to the East India Marine Society (later the Peabody Museum of 
Salem). 1 Like the paintings made for William Fraser (see nos. 49, 50), they 
prefigure photography, and their creation can be ascribed to the desire for 
"scientific" visual documentation that contributed to the invention of the 
camera. 

Highly naturalistic sculptures of this sort were made at Krishnaghur, 
a village near Calcutta, as well as at Hatwa, Datan (near Saran), Muzaffar- 



pur, Dacca, Burdwan, and, later, Lucknow and Poona. They resemble 
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century creche figures made in Naples, which 
are similarly detailed and dressed in cloth garments. Perhaps an Englishman 
familiar with the Neapolitan examples — standard memorabilia from the 
Grand Tour — and aware of both the very skillful Bengali makers of poly- 
chromed clay images and the naturalistic Mughal tradition inspired this 
art form. 

1. Archives, Peabody Museum of Salem. 

I would like to thank Susan Bean for providing much of the information used in this 
entry. 

In West Bengal, a humble caste of roving Jadupatuas, or painter-story- 
tellers, painted scrolls showing legendary or topical events to illustrate their 
dramatic recitations for village audiences. To earn extra money, these enter- 
prising entertainers, on learning of a death in a tribal village, would scurry 
to the house of the deceased and offer the family a pat, or memorial portrait, 
the fee determined by a rapid evaluation of the family's bullocks, ornaments, 
and cooking pots. Once the portrait had been produced, it was apparent that 
the eyes lacked pupils, and the wily artist would explain that the late lamented 
was fated to be a blind wanderer in the other world, a problem that he could 
correct — for an additional sum — by painting in the eyes. Usually, such pic- 
tures were powerful silhouettes, true to type but not actual likenesses, showing 
one or two figures — if tragedy had struck twice — set against the bare and 
very cheap paper. This example is altogether exceptional in showing a lady 
who must have been of considerable importance within her Midnapur 
community, attended by servants or family members, in a house rich with 
European style oil lamps and other signs of wealth. 




46. 

MORTUARY PAT: A LADY FROM 
MIDNAPUR 

West Bengal, Midnapur, mid-1 9th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 15 3 /* x 3()Va in. 
(40X78.1 cm.) 

Asutosh Museum of Indian Art, 
University of Calcutta (T.2573) 



46 




47 



Embroidered quilts called kanthas were once made by country women — of 
all castes and classes, both Hindus and Muslims — in all parts of Bengal, 
usually for their own domestic use or as special gifts. Large kanthas served 
as bedspreads or as wraps to be worn, smaller ones as cradle cloths or covers 
for books or mirrors. The women of the Tanti (weaver) and Dhobi 
(washerman) castes were especially adept at embroidering them; the best 
come from East Bengal (Bangladesh), where the Kayastha women, from the 
homes of middle-class clerks and scribes, produced the most ornate of the 
known examples. No kantha made before the nineteenth century survives, 
and by the early decades of the twentieth century kantha making was 
discontinued. 

Kanthas were made from carefully selected old and discarded white 
cotton dhotis. The cloth from women's saris was never used, but colored 
threads meticulously drawn out from the borders of old saris were used for 
the embroidery. To achieve the required thickness, several layers of white 
cloth of uniform fabric and texture were laid evenly on a mat, patched if 
necessary, and stitched together around the edges with white thread. The 
surface was compartmented, and geometric, floral, or figural designs were 
drawn in with thin lines of charcoal. The actual embroidery was started at 
the center, usually with a traditional medallion, and the work proceeded 
outward. 

All the patterns and figures on a kantha are imbued with symbolic 
meaning. The form and placing of the motifs and the combination of colors 
and stitches were dictated by the imagination of the embroiderer and thus 
reflect her personality. The ingeniously employed stitches not only reinforce 
the white cloth but give the kantha an overall liveliness and a distinctive 
character. The patterns were filled in with running stitches in colored thread 
and then defined by back stitching. In the intervening spaces on the white 
field, closely parallel running stitches in white thread were made to follow 
the outlines of the figures and motifs, producing the effect of modeling and 



47. 

KANTHA WITH DESIGN OF BIRDS AND 
ANIMALS 

Bengal, late 19th century 
White cotton, quilted and embroidered with 
colors, \S-% X 25% in. (40 X 65 cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.1514) 



giving the textured surface of each kantha a tonality all its own. In the early 
nineteenth century, the designs were embroidered mainly in madder-dyed 
red and indigo blue thread; in the latter half of the century, yellows and 
greens were added. 

Designed by the women themselves, kanthas arc infused with the vital- 
ity and spontaneity of the folk art for which Bengal is so famous. No two 
kanthas are alike, but because repertoires of designs, colors, and stitches 
were often handed down from one generation of women to the next, kanthas 
from the same village or district have features in common. Some are embroi- 
dered only with ancient Hindu symbols and with objects popular in Bengal, 
some illustrate Hindu myth and ritual, and some show scenes of contempo- 
rary everyday life. Our kantha belongs to a fourth group, in which stylized 
plants and symbols surround archaic figures, sometimes, as here, just ani- 
mals and birds, sometimes human beings as well. 

This coverlet is a masterpiece among small kanthas. Birds, animals (a 
cow, a fish, a butterfly, and other creatures), and floral motifs are embroi- 
dered in red, yellow, green, and black on the white field, which is enclosed 
by a border of two broad bands, one purplish brown, the other green, both 
edged in yellow. Closely spaced running stitches in white thread, cleverly 
made to run along the contours of all the figures, enliven the design. The 
woman who designed this small coverlet and executed it with her needle 
created much more than a traditional kantha. Her flight of fancy is like folk 
painting at its best. 

J.M. 




48. 

SIX BATTLING WARRIORS 
Rajasthan, late 19th century 
Watercolor on paper, 4V+ X 10 in. 
(10.8x25.4 cm.) 

jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.209) 



The style of this picture, done in watercolor on an unpainted ground, fits 
no known Indian folk idiom, nor are there any of the clues — subject, palette, 
details of costume and ornament — that usually link folk paintings to a partic- 
ular region or village. Unsophisticated, naive, innocent as a child's painting, 
this is obviously not the work of a professional. Yet in spite of his lack of 
training and limited knowledge of technique, the village artist managed to 
infuse his six dynamic warriors, fiercely battling with their fists and what 
could be either maces or swords, with unusual vitality and directness. 



J.M. 



Authentic as dust in sunlight, this group portrait of villagers brings with 
it a notable snippet of history. On a quiet evening in 1835, Sir Thomas 
Theophilus Metcalf, a typical English squire transplanted to Delhi — where 
he served as British resident at the Mughal court — was enjoying his collec- 
tion of Napoleonic memorabilia when servants interrupted. William Fraser, 
for whom this picture was painted, his friend and a fellow agent of the governor- 
general, had been shot dead. Fraser, who was born in Scotland in 1784 and 
arrived in India in 1799, was known as an erratic, often wayward, gregari- 
ous fellow, admired by his many prestigious English and Indian friends but 



49. 

TAX COLLECTORS AND 

VILLAGE ELDERS 

From the Fraser Album 

Probably by Ghulam c Ali Khan 

Delhi or Haryana, early 19th century 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 20% x \5V, in. (52.7 x 38.7 cm.) 

Miniature: H)Vi X 15 Va in. (26.7 X 38.7 cm. 

The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 

Harvard University Art Museums, 

Cambridge, Massachusetts 





49, detail 



reputed to be a ruthless and tightfisted manager of his own extensive es- 
tates in Haryana. Whole villages, it was claimed, packed up and moved to 
avoid his merciless tax collectors. 

Fraser's murder was ascribed not to outraged villagers but to assassins 
in the hire of a young nobleman, Shams ad-Din, nawab of Firozpur, who 
believed Fraser had blocked his inheritance of title and fortune. A remark- 
ably colorful career during a most vital period of British India had ended at 
its zenith. 

William Fraser is important as the patron of superb gouaches that sweep 
one back to northwestern India of the 1810s to 1830s. William shared the 
artistic sensibility of his brother James Baillie Fraser, whose appealing ro- 
mantic landscape prints still enliven bedroom walls of Rajput palaces and 
old-fashioned Indian hotels. He hired at least two artists trained in the Mughal 
imperial ateliers, the brilliant Ghulam c Ali Khan and an unidentified lesser 
hand. Accompanying Fraser on his missions to the Punjab and the Himalayas, 
they were kept very busy recording the activities of Indian people in a series 
of more than one hundred accurately rendered studies. Leafing through Fraser's 
nostalgic album, one meets the inhabitants ot the world he encountered: 
musicians, soldiers, yogis, Sufis, merchants, murderers, dancing girls, princes, 
courtesans, and — above all — villagers, sketched on the move, in characteris- 
tic settings and costumes. The earliest of these album pictures, on English 
paper, were painted in purely Mughal opaque watcrcolor technique, but 
soon the artists adjusted to Fraser's taste for transparent washes. 

In this group portrait Jat and Rajput ciders, probably headmen from 
Fraser's own villages, suffer the attentions of his agents, a clerkish scribe and 
a sleek Muslim. Except for the Muslim's outmoded costume, everything 
here can be seen today in the villages of Haryana. As was customary, the 



96 



patron numbered each portrait and diligently penciled the subjects' names 
on the attached protective page. Despite the business at hand, the character- 
izations represent Fraser's sympathetically warmhearted mood, communi- 
cated to his artist and well served by the latter's remarkable ability to reach 
the sitters' inner spirits. 

Published: Sotheby's, London, July 7, 1980, lot 4. 

For an account of William Frascr and his circle, see: Spear, The Twilight oj the Mughal*. 



More convincing and informative than any photograph, this picture repre- 
sents one of two village complexes rendered to William Fraser's meticulous 
specifications (see no. 49). The artist was trained in the Mughal tradition, 
which ordinarily eschewed genre subjects (but see nos. 140, 159, 160), and 
one assumes that he was shown English or European townscapes on which 
to base perspective and composition. Painting from life, in English water- 
color technique but with a miniaturist's attention to minute detail, the artist 
noted distinctive vignettes that to this day fascinate travelers in rural India: a 
peacock strutting on a skewed and weathered thatched root; an old lady 
pounding meal to make chapatis; huge sculptural earthenware grain-storage 
jars; meandering bullocks, cows, and camels; and mud walls looking as 
though they had grown in place. Most appealing of all, of course, is the 
multitude of villagers going about their chores in a camouflage of sweat 
and dust. 



50. 

RAUNEAH, A VILLAGE IN THE PUNJAB 

From the Fraser Album 

Probably by Ghulam c Ali Khan 

Punjab, early 19th century 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 12-Vh x I6V2 in. 

(31.5 x 42 cm.) 

The British Library, India Office Library and 
Records, London 



Published: Sotheby's, London, July 7, 1980, lot 22. 




50 



51. 

DEMON 

South India, perhaps 17th century 
Brass, height 13'/2 in. (34.3 cm.) 
Collection Leo S. Figiel, Atlantis, Florida 



This folk image expresses the awesome, even terrifying potency ot a pri- 
meval village demon. His help might have been sought to cure malaria or 
smallpox, to promote fertility, to appease — or torment — a threatening 
money lender, or to hasten a delayed monsoon. When worshiped, the image 
was probably housed in the chamber of a small shrine, lighted by flickering 
clay oil lamps, partly shined by the touches of devotees, and partly hidden 
beneath accumulated dust, and offerings of ghee, vermilion powder, and 
flower petals. 

Most Indian bronzes are made by the cire perdue, or lost wax, process, 
which usually entails modeling the core of the object, somewhat smaller 
than the proposed metal one, in medium rough clay mixed with dung. The 
core is then covered with a skin of fine clay, after which the clay model is 
covered with a layer of wax (beeswax and dammar resin from the sal tree), 
sometimes enriched by rolled wax pellets or wirelike elements, and worked 
in detail with bamboo and tamarind wood tools. The mold is then built up 
with a coating of soft clay (three parts clay to one part powdered pottery, 
ground together), into which metal strips or nails are inserted, reaching into 
the wax image. An opening is made in the base of the image and mold, 
and after the whole has dried, the wax is melted out. The mold is then heated 
and inverted. Molten metal is poured in, in a steady stream, so that it reaches 
every area once filled with wax. Heavier images are made by modeling in 
solid wax, without a core. Once the object has been cooled by sprinkling it 
with water, the craftsman carefully chisels away the clay crust, or mold, and 
cuts away the metal strips or nails. Cleaning, chasing, and polishing follow. 



Published: Kramrisch, Unknown India, p. 91, no. 89, pi. xxn; Christie's, New York, 
December 1, 1982, lot 164. 



Kerala is a land of dance. Best known for kathakali, its evolved dance- 
drama, it is also noted for many folk traditions. At festival times, like flowers 
suddenly in bloom, villagers dressed in magnificent masked headdresses such 
as this one performed ancient religious dances. Relying on designs passed 
down for generations among families of craftsmen and dancers, villagers 
fashioned the headdresses from available materials — plantain leaves, cotton 
cloth, wood, fibers, and indigenous dyes and pigments. 

Many of these folk traditions, such as the Mudiyettu, a stylized dance- 
drama devoted to the Puranic story of Darika-Vadha, in which the goddess 
Kali slays the demon Darika, are still performed at certain temples. Less formal 
and less complex traditions retain elements of spontaneous trance, exorcism, 
and release. This headdress, which brings to mind the art of New Guinea 
and New Ireland, seems to belong to an early, vital stage in the evolution 
of dance. 



52. 

HEADDRESS AND MASK FOR A DANCE 
Kerala, ca. 1900 

Painted wood, cloth, peacock feathers, glass 
beads, shells, paper, silver foil, cord, and cane 
fiber, height with feathers 66 Vi in. (168.9 cm.) 
State Museum, Trichur 



An exciting discovery of some 150 life-sized wooden sculptures of divinities, 
attendants, and animals was made not long ago at Basrur, a village by the 
sea surrounded by forest. The sculptures belonged to a shrine named 
Mekkekattu, where local fishermen and their families worshiped. 1 One of 
the livelier figures is this ample chauri bearer, holding up her yak-tail whisk 
to honor one of the deities. Her simplified, extravagant form recalls the 



53. 

CHAURI BEARER 
Karnataka, 18th century 
Wood, originally polychromed, 
height 5 ft. 3 in. (1.6 m.) 
Folklore Museum, Mysore 





53 



sculpture of the Baga tribe of Africa, and her ruggedly geometric features 
bring to mind the expressive profiles of early Rajput paintings, such as are 
shown in the large battle scene from Uttar Pradesh (no. 225), a stylistic 
affinity spanning considerable time and distance. 

1. Other sculptures from Mekkekattu are in the Folklore Museum, Mysore, and in 
the Crafts Museum, New Delhi. See: Kramrisch, Unknown India, nos. 113-16. 





54, three-quarters 



54, front 



54. 

GRAVE EFFIGY: FIGURE OF A WOMAN 
Nicobar Islands, 19th century 
Wood and red ochre, height 44% in. (114 cm.) 
National Museum, New Delhi (80.579) 



This nobly impressive statue of a woman was collected by Sankho Chaud- 
huri, who has told us that it was found under a tree on the island of Katchall. 
On Katchall, it is the duty of young men to install in front of the family 
alpanan (house on stilts) wood carvings that depict their fathers, so that 
families virtually live with their dead parents. As spirit members of the 
household, these images are given propitiatory offerings of food and drink 
every day; and sometimes, according to Chaudhuri, little bottles containing 
alcohol are suspended from their outstretched arms. When a new effigy is 
installed, earlier images are removed. Statues of women, such as this one, 
are extremely rare. 



55. 

SORCERY FIGURE 
Malabar Coast, Mappilla, 19th century 
Wood, height 60 in. (152.4 cm.) 
Government Museum, Madras (605) 



Spectral in its silent, geometric power and lean harmony of proportion, 
this piece so struck the museum world of India in the days when objects of 
this sort were usually denigrated as ethnographic curiosities that it was col- 
lected for a great museum. Edgar Thurston, then superintendent of the Ma- 
dras Government Museum, which acquired it, discussed and illustrated it in 
his monumental anthropological study, attributing it to the Mappillas, or 



100 



55 > 



Mohplas, who are described as "the hybrid Mahomedan race of the western 
coast. . . . The Mappilla jins and shaitans correspond to the Hindu demons, 
and are propitiated in much the same way. One of their methods of witch- 
craft is to make a wooden figure to represent the enemy, drive nails into all 
the vital parts, and throw it into the sea." Of this work in particular he goes 
on to say: "In 1903, a life-size nude female figure, with feet everted and 
turned backwards, carved out of the wood of Alstonia scholaris, was washed 
ashore at Calicut. Long nails had been driven in all over the head, body, and 
limbs, and a large square hole cut out above the navel. Inscriptions in Arabic 
characters were scrawled over it." 1 

1. Thurston, Tribes and Castes, vol. 4, p. 489. 

Published: Thurston, Tribes and Castes, vol. 4, p. 489; Mookcrjcc, Indian Primitive Art, 
p. 68, pi. xxxviii. 



This tomb cover was being used as a canopy over a stall when Mr. and Mrs. 
William G. Archer came upon it at a village fair in the vicinity of Bahraich 
in the early 1930s. Timeless as it may be artistically — the cheerfully ani- 
mated design recalls Alexander Calder's Circus, Matisse's cutouts, and Greek 
geometric painted pottery — one can be specific about its purpose and histori- 
cal background. According to legend, Salar Mas c ud, a nephew of Mahmud 
of Ghazni, was slain in battle in 1033 or 1034. By 1325, a cult had evolved 



56. 

KANDURI 

Uttar Pradesh, Bahraich, ca. 1900 
Cotton, embroidered and appliqued, 15 ft. 
3 in. X6ft. 1 in. (4.65 x 1.85 m.) 
Collection Michael Archer and Margaret 
Lecomber, London 




57 



around his tomb. Despite the august recognition of Muhammad Tughluq 
and Firoz Shah in the late fourteenth century, the cult tended to be regarded 
very critically by orthodox Muslims. 

It is said that the tomb is located on the site of an old temple to Surya, 
the sun god, and that the saint was slain on the night of his marriage to 
Zahra Bibi of Rudauli, whose tomb is nearby. In his name, spears were taken 
out and paraded, and it is claimed that he converted the Mewatis near Delhi, 
who continue to honor his memory with their spear ceremonies. When the 
saint's anniversary is celebrated, offerings of flags are made in honor of his 
flagstaff, one of the shrine's relics. During the celebration, the flag is also 
known as a kanduri, or tablecloth, because of the offerings of food and 
incense made to it. After the initial offering has been ceremonially buried, 
the rest is distributed on the new cloths brought by the devotees. People 
suffering from leg trouble make pilgrimages to Salar Mas c ud, and when 
they are healed they make little horses of wheat flour boiled in syrup called 
khule ghore (frisky horses) — like those embroidered here — which are blessed 
with the Fatiha and then distributed. 

Ordinarily, kanduris arc deeply stained by food and singed by incense. 
The Archer piece is a particularly large, splendid, and well-preserved example. 

Published: Wheeler and Jayakar, Textiles and Ornaments of India, p. 28; Kramrisch, 
Unknown India, pp. 74, 100, no. 195, pi. XL. 



57. 

CARVED DOOR 

Madhya Pradesh, Gondwana, Bastar area, 
perhaps Gond tribe, early 20th century 
Wood, 401/8 X 24'/4 in. (102 X 61.5 cm.) 
Zonal Anthropological Museum, Jagdalpur 
(1163) 



Although each tribal group in India lives according to a slightly different 
pattern, most of them possess a communal house where the young people 
gather. At once an entertainment center, community hall, and music room, 
its door and walls are usually adorned with appropriate motifs, which today 
are likely to include airplanes, bicycles, and buses. Examples such as this 
one, suggestive of a premechanistic age, offer timeless animals, a plow, wheels, 
a comb, and a hunter aiming his rifle at a buck. In their vital simplicity, these 
configurations recall punch-marked coins of the Mauryan period (320- 
183 B.C.). 




58 



Unusually large and complex in its casting, this vibrantly expressive bronze 
describes the fourteen-year exile in the Dandakaranya Forest of Rama, the 
central figure of the Ramayana, the ancient epic known to every Hindu villager, 
for whom it is a perennial source of entertainment and moral instruction 
(see no. 13). Although he is the legitimate heir to the throne of Ayodhya in 
northern India, Rama is banished through the unscrupulous machinations 
of his stepmother and condemned to exile and futile wandering. Rama cheer- 
fully accepts his fate, and the privations to which he and the heroine Sita are 
subjected are alleviated by his loyal brother Lakshmana and by the monkey 
god Hanuman — all of whom are shown here in the wilds, represented by 
trees and a tiger. One is reminded by the seemingly masked personages 
— mustachioed Rama and Lakshmana, gentle Sita, and submissive Hanuman 
— of folk dance-dramas still current in India. 



58. 

RAMA, SITA, LAKSHMANA, AND 
HANUMAN IN THE DANDAKARANYA 
FOREST 

West Bengal, Purulia District, 17th century 
Bronze, 4 3 A X 9% X 3'/« in. (12 X 25 x 8 cm.) 
Private collection 





59 



Although court art, with its swift changes of fashion, can be dated al- 
most to the year, works of art by sculptors closer to nature and to the soil 
defy the art historian's desire for chronological exactitude, demonstrating 
the continuity in spirit and form through the centuries. 

Singing or chanting as she holds a bowl and stick, this thin-limbed, 
loose-jointed bronze representation of a village goddess, her breasts reduced 
to pellets, her torso to a thin strip of metal, radiates an enigmatic, earthy 
power. In her lean vitality, she recalls the beguiling naked maiden from 
Mohenjo-Daro, of the late third or early second millennium B.C. This god- 
dess also defies spatial boundaries, for despite its smallness, it is spiritually 
one of the most monumental figures here. 



59. 

THE VIRGIN GRAMA DEVATA 
Maharashtra, date unknown 
Bronze, height 2 3 /t in. (7 cm.) 
Private collection 



Published: Jayakar, The Earthen Drum, pp. 266-67, fig. 279. 



60 



60. 

HORSE 

Provenance and date unknown 
Bronze, height 3 in. (7.5 cm.) 
Private collection 



Proud as a king of beasts, this stocky, lively horse was modeled with firm 
persuasiveness from a chunky fistful of wax. In the process, the animal's 
chest and back took on, in reverse, the organic hollow of the sculptor's 
cupped palm, which also smoothed and rounded the forms with its melting 
warmth. His large noble head held high, eyes confronting us with a touch of 
disdain, he seems about to neigh disapproval of our attempt to assign 
a provenance. When a sculpture is so reduced to essentials, it is especially hard 
to place; and if the Indian origin of this one were not secure, one might find 
a look of China in the treatment of the eye and muzzle, or a touch of Egypt 
in the swelling girth. 



61. 

BOAR 

Provenance and date unknown 
Bronze, height 4V» in. (11 cm.) 
Private collection 



Bronze animals on wheels (missing in this example) have been excavated 
from Bronze Age sites in India. As with so many Indian artifacts, the lines 
are blurred between the secular and the religious. Was this uncharacteristi- 
cally amiable boar, with its well-rubbed mask and spine, a plaything for 
some fortunate child; was it an offering for a shrine; or does it represent the 
manifestation, or avatar, of the god Vishnu as Varaha, the boar, in whose 
form he slew the demon Hiranyaksha? One suspects that it served in all 
three capacities, for this imposing object was made to last. After its current 
phase as an objet d'art, nourishing to aesthetes, it may one day return to one 
or all of its traditional roles — if, indeed, it does not find a new one. 1 

1. For objects from the Daimabad hoard, datable to about 1000 B.C., see: Allchin and 
Allchin, The Rise of Civilization in India, figs. l().14a-c, 10.15. In nineteenth-century 
miniature paintings depicting Shn Nathji of Nathadwara, one often sees bronze 
"toys" as offerings. 



62. 

KHANDOBA (KHANDE RAO) 
Maharashtra, Jcjuri, 17th century 
Bronze, height 4Vi in. (11.5 cm.) 
Private collection 



So ruggedly shaped in wax as to resemble candle drippings, this slowly 
advancing warhorse with its two stern and weighty riders brings to mind 
encounters in rural India with sturdy village headmen riding similarly ro- 
bust horses on their daily rounds of the fields. The sculptor must have thought 
of such impressive local potentates when he modeled this image of Khandoba, 
or Khande Rao (the Maratha name for the god Shiva), holding a trident and 
drum in his right hand and accompanied by his consort, Parvati, with an 



106 



61 D> 



62 63 



attendant and a hound. The platform bears a Shiva lingam as well as symbols 
of the sun and the moon. 

Inasmuch as the Marathas are known for their military prowess (even 
today they are well represented in the Indian army), it is natural that their 
favorite deity — to whom a cluster of temples at Jejuri, near Poona, are 
dedicated— should be Lord Shiva, god of creation and destruction, seen as a 
well-armed, hard-riding cavalryman (see also no. 204). 



63. 

GODDESS OFFERING FOOD 
Orissa, 16th century 
Bronze, height 4 3 /« in. (11.3 cm.) 
Private collection 



Some folk bronzes startle; others awe, or disturb, or excite fear. This image 
of a mother goddess, symbolic of divine feminine energy and fecundity, of- 
fers food with sweet generosity. The mood is reinforced by the softly lus- 
trous patination — the result of fond, gentle worship over many generations. 
Her devotees probably belonged to a single family, whose shrine she occupied. 
Her ropelike ornaments are similar to those still in use by aboriginal tribes. 

The relationship of this piece from Orissa to small pottery sculptures 
from Bengal, not far away, reveals the close connection between the modeling 
of clay and the modeling of wax for bronze casting by the cire perdue process. 
In each case the material is malleable, easy to roll between the palms of the 
hands and form into a conical base, such as the one seen here, or to shape 
into flattened pellets to be attached as cheeks or eyes, or as beads of a necklace. 



WS 



This head of a village deity, whose identity is not known, was produced in 
eastern Madhya Pradesh, where the forested region is chiefly inhabited by the 
Gond tribes. Several places in Madhya Pradesh have a long and distinguished 
tradition of making bronze images; in the Bastar region, cire perdue metal 
casting is still a living art form. For centuries the Gonds have been buying 
ritual objects and images of their deities made by the local hereditary 
community of metal artisans. 

Neither naturalistic nor abstract, this admirable head sculpted in the 
round is at once one of the most delightful and most powerful examples of 
metal folk art from Bastar. The bearded face, with its mysterious smile, 
seems to change its expression in different lighting conditions and at differ- 
ent hours of the day. The prominent oval eyes, encased in a grooved band on 
the upper eyelid and double wire on the lower, impart a hypnotizing stare to 
the face, while the discreet beaded ornament on the nose, eyebrows, earlobes, 
and neck, and the circular rings on the forehead add to the overall effect. All 
these and other details combine to enhance both the sculptural quality and 
the distinct godly identity of the image. 

J.M. 



64. 

HEAD OF A VILLAGE GOD 

Bastar, 18th century 

Brass, height 5 l A in. (13.2 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 

Art, Hyderabad (76.979) 





64 



109 



65 



65. 

THE BUFFALO DEMON MAHISA 

Rajasthan, 16th century 

Bronze, height 6% in. (17.5 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 

Art, Hyderabad (76.899) 



Although the identity of this unusual animal figure baffles us at first glance, 
we are convinced that it is from a Mahisasuramardini composition, in which 
the Great Goddess Durga, accompanied by her vehicle the lion, is depicted 
killing the buffalo demon Mahisa. (The companion figure of the lion, cast 
separately, is also in the Mittal Museum, but the whereabouts of the main 
figure, Durga, are not known.) The legend is narrated in the A4arkatidcya 
Parana: 

After Mahisa, Lord of Demons, defeated all the gods, an- 
gered energy arose from their bodies like a burning mountain. 
It filled heaven and earth and, gathering its blaze into one, it 
became a woman, the Great Goddess Durga. Each of the gods 
presented her with his weapons, and with all of their arms, as 
if in merest play, she fought the army of Mahisa, the invincible 
— and covetous — demon, who had taken the shape of a buffalo 
(mahisa). When Mahisa attacked the lion — the vehicle of Durga 
— she flung her noose over him. He abandoned his buffalo 
shape and suddenly became a lion, then a man; but she slew 
him in every form he took. He resumed his buffalo shape; she 
leaped on him and, kicked by her foot, he issued forth from 
his own mouth. The goddess struck off his head. 1 

This monumental figure of the demon has been conceived with a touch 
of fantasy. The agitated energy of the awesome Mahisa pervades the abstract, 
compact, almost rocklike form of the buffalo, which extends its left front 
foot and turns its head backward as Mahisa, his hair pulled up, dramatically 
issues forth from his own mouth to face the onslaught of the goddess and 
fight his last battle for survival. 

J.M. 

1. Kramrisch, Manifestations of Shiva, p. 96. 



uo 



As befits her position as Mahadcvi, the Great Goddess trots along with 
utter assurance. Alternatively mild — as Uma (Light), Gauri (the Yellow or 
Brilliant), Parvati (Shiva's consort on Mount Kailash), or Haimavati (the 
Mother of the World) — she is shown here in her destructive aspect, as Durga, 
a beautiful yellow woman mounted on a tiger, perhaps on her way to de- 
stroy the terrible demon Mahisa (see no. 65). This vital little image, which 
exemplifies Indian rural art, is, in effect, a portable, always available "dry- 
cell battery" of religious and artistic power. 



66. 

DURGA RIDING HER LION 

Himachal Pradesh, perhaps Chamba, 

16th— 18th century 

Brass, height 4 in. (10.2 cm.) 

Collection Leo S. Figiel, Atlantis, Florida 



The Punjab Hill states are well known for their paintings. The region also 
had a great bronze tradition, both classical and folk, and Kulu, Chamba, and 
Kangra were particularly active centers for metal casting. This tall slim girl, 
who wears little jewelry, originally held a chhattar (umbrella) behind a deity, 
though which one we do not know. When in actual use in a temple, the 
figure would have been clothed, but the garments could not have affected 
her erect, animated stance or disturbed the expression on her face, which is 
full of humility as she gazes downward with a gentle smile. The unique 
conception of the shaping and positioning of the arms, legs, and torso gives 
this sculpture a special abstract quality and strength. The girl's tubular, exag- 
geratedly elongated limbs and her serene, sharp-featured head are rare in a 
Pahari bronze. Her face is in fact reminiscent of the bashfully graceful charm 
and liveliness of the female figures in early Pahari paintings. 

J.M. 



67. 

STANDING FEMALE CHHATTAR 
BEARER 

Punjab Hills, 16th century 
Bronze, height 9 5 A in. (24.5 cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indi; 
Art, Hyderabad (76.1048) 




66 



The elephant-headed Gancsha, lord (isha) of hosts (ganas), is venerated 
chiefly by Hindus, but Buddhists also worship him. No other deity has been 
so often portrayed in Indian sculpture and painting in such a variety of 
forms. The legends about Ganesha's origins are numerous: according to one 
tradition, he was born of Shiva and his consort Parvati; another says he was 
fashioned by Parvati herself. Ganesha, also called Vighneshvara, lord who 
creates and removes obstacles, is worshiped in innumerable ways. On 
auspicious occasions all worship must begin with invocation of Ganesha, 
and his idols are worshiped with great pomp on the fourth lunar day of the 
month of Bhadrapad (August-September). Large images in stone and metal 
are enshrined in temples; smaller ones, mostly in metal, arc used in household 
shrines or carried on travels. In the houses of the well-to-do, Ganesha is 
carved in wood on doorjambs, and in many places likenesses of him are 
painted above entryways. At weddings in Gujarat, he is embroidered on 
panels hung on the wall and worshiped by the bride and groom. 

A wealth of creative imagery is used to depict Ganesha in the small folk 
bronzes made for worship in homes or village shrines. Representations are 
often humorous, but, like this one, they can also be aesthetically moving. 
Our image was used in the Panchayatana Puja, a Hindu ritual wherein Ganesha 
is worshiped either alone or in the company of Vishnu, Shiva, Aditya, and 
Shakti. The style of this remarkably fine example from eastern India is dis- 
tinctive and unusual. Panchayatana images, most of them small, are commonly 
made in Maharashtra, or sometimes in Karnataka or Central India, but they 
rarely come from Bihar, where this bronze was made. 

In some Panchayatana images, Gancsha is given a higher place in the 
hierarchy of the gods, as he is here. Ganesha sits on his vehicle, the rat, atop 
a high, footed pedestal. He has two arms, and his tubular trunk is coiled in a 
frontal position. At his right is a trident; at his left arc a peacock (the vehicle 
of his brother, Karttikeya) and Parvati, seated with her hands folded in 
salutation. In the center, a naga shelters a lingam, symbol of Shiva, and in 
the foreground stand a lion (Parvati's vehicle) and a bull (Nandi; see no. 14). 
Ganesha's prominent crown, a trefoil composed of spiraling wire, and the 
rhizomelike shaping of all the elements of the composition are typical of the 
bronzes made at Tatijharia for the villagers of southern Bihar. 1 The bronze 
has acquired a blackish patina from being kept continuously in a small shrine 
filled with smoke. 

j.M. 

1. Only a few examples of Tatijharia bronzes are known. For two others, see: Reeves, 
Cire Perdue Casting, p. 63, pi. 36; Getty, Ganesa, pi. 13b. 



68. 

TWO-ARMED SEATED GANESHA 
Bihar, Tatijharia, early 19th century 
Brass, height 5Vx in. (14.3 cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.1082) 



69. 

GROUP OF BRACELETS AND BANGLES 

a. PAIR OF BRONZE BANGLES 

Perhaps Madhya Pradesh, 19th century 
Height 2Y4 in. (7 cm.) 
Private collection 



Bangles and ankle bracelets alone could make a representative exhibition 
of Indian art, for these infinitely varied, often remarkably sculptural works 
can be found everywhere in India and in all sectors of the population. Many 
materials could be represented: twisted cotton or other fiber, bone and ivory, 
brass and bronze, silver and gold, enamel and jewels. Some are massive and 
astonishingly heavy. But wearing them on wrists, upper arms, or ankles is 
not enervating but empowering; and dancing with several pounds of metal 
just above one's thudding feet fuses soul to soil, a source of exalting energy. 

Designed to fit against the inner surface of the wrist, the fmials pressing 
against the outside of the forearm, is a pair of brassy bronze bangles (a) 
perhaps from Madhya Pradesh. They were modeled in wax, stamped with 
designs reminiscent of those on Mauryan punch-marked coins, and cast by 
the cire perdue process. The shapes are suggestively ambiguous: are they 
snakes, or grain, or tuberous roots? Whatever they represent, the village 
sculptors who devised this wondrous design over the centuries gave tangible 
expression to the rhythms of growth and life. 

Two monumental ivory bangles (b) from southern Rajasthan or Gujarat, 
not a true pair, would once have formed part of the dowries of well-to-do 



b. ivory bangles 

Southern Rajasthan or Gujarat, 19th century 
Height 4'/2 in. (11.4 cm.), diameter 3 5 /s in. 
(9.2"cm.) 
Private collection 

The Kronos Collections, New York 

C. PAIR OF BRASS CHAIN-LINK 
ANKLE BRACELETS 
Rajasthan, 18th— 19th century 
Diameter 5Vi in. (14 cm.) 
Private collection 

d. PAIR OF ELEPHANT(?) BONE BANGLES 
WITH SHELL AND GLASS BEADS 
Nagaland, Naga tribe, early 19th century 
Height 2 in. (5.1 cm.) 
Private collection 

C. BRONZE BANGLE OR WRIST GUARD 

Nagaland, Naga tribe, probably 17th century 
Height 4'/n in. (10.5 cm.) 
Private collection 



113 




m a-c 



village girls. Splendidly ample, they suggest two great egg cups that might 
have been commissioned from Brancusi. From Rajasthan comes a pair of 
heavy chain-link ankle bracelets (c). Sturdy as anchor chain, but tighter and 
more complex in construction, they follow the contour of any ankle; and 
when worn, another quality emerges: their sound, which brings invigorat- 
ing rhythmic bell clanks to the ancient choreographed ritual of the harvest 
when swaying, singing village women, balancing the grain on their heads in 
sheaves, parade in single file from the fields at dusk. 

The much worn, naturally polished bangles, perhaps made of elephant 
bone (d), fastened around the wrists with fiber cord strung with tubular 
shell and blue glass beads, have taken on the appetizing hue of milk chocolate. 
The Art Deco shape brings to mind a three-fingered clenched fist. A Naga 
bangle (e), finely cast of silvery bronze and probably dating to the seven- 
teenth century or earlier, is lightweight and thin, but threatening. The wrist- 
guard form, ornamented with meandering spirals, sprouts a series of 
belligerent "mushrooms, " harmless to brush against but damaging in combat. 



114 



One of the pleasures of visiting rural India is to observe the changing de- 
signs of costumes, textile patterns, and ornaments as one moves trom re- 
gion to region. Still seen occasionally in Tamil Nadu are traditional ear 
ornaments of the sort shown here, objects of startlingly cubistic design made 
by village silversmiths according to traditional patterns slightly adjusted 
over the centuries. This pair made from brazed sheets of silver seem to 
represent birds, perhaps peacocks savoring worms, now so stylized as to be 
barely discernible. The craftsmanship is as remarkable as the design. 



70. 

EAR ORNAMENTS 
Tamil Nadu, 19th century 
Silver, height l 5 /«in. (4.1 cm. 
Private collection 




70 



Overleaf, 109, detail D> 



III. THE 




MUSLIM COURTS 




THE MUSLIM COURTS 



THE DELHI SULTANATE: 1192-1526 

Islam reached the Indian subcontinent in several successive 
waves. In the eighth century Arab armies, representing the 
new militant faith, invaded Sind. They remained there and 
gradually settled to live in relative harmony with the In- 
dian peoples. Early in the eleventh century, the repeated 
onslaughts of Mahmud of Ghazni considerably reduced 
the power of the Rajput chiefs, themselves descended from 
other Central Asian tribes, whose separate clans ruled small 
kingdoms in northwestern India. But this hardly modified 
the pattern of Indian culture. India's religious life remained 
relatively unaffected for another two centuries, except for 
the continuing decline of Buddhism and the rise of the 
popular Tantric cult, named after its scriptures the Tantras, 
which centered on incantations and magico-religious rites 
and rituals as a means to salvation. 

It was only at the end of the twelfth century, after the 
invading armies of the Ghaznevid ruler Shihab ad-Din Ghori 
defeated the Rajput forces of Pritvi Raj at the Battle of 
Tarain in 1192, that Muslim rule was firmly established in 
India, eventually extending over the major part of the sub- 
continent for the next 500 years. 

Delhi became the seat of power of the Turkish sultans, 
no doubt because of its strategic position allowing access 
both to the Ganges Valley and to Central and western India. 
Within a decade Banaras was sacked, the great fortress of 
Gwalior captured, and Bihar annexed, with a massacre of 
monks that virtually ended Buddhism in India. Early in the 
next century, Bengal was added to the Turkish empire. 
Under Sultan Iltutmish (r. 1211-36), the great Sultanate of 
Delhi became the largest and most powerful dominion in 
India. Hindu kingdoms — Gujarat, Malwa, Mewar, Jaun- 
pur, and Gaur, for example — survived within it on a 
tributary basis. 

The Delhi sultans dreamed of establishing an empire 
that would embrace all of India, but, under constant threat 
of Mongol invasion in the north and northwest, they were 
never able to extend farther south than the tableland of the 



Deccan. A new dynasty of Turks, the Khaljis, came to 
power in 1290, and the reign of 'Ala 3 ad-Din Khalji 
(1296-1316) marks the height of the Sultanate's political 
power, both territorially and in terms of the sultan's abso- 
lute sovereignty, which was subject only to the tenets of 
the Shari c a, the Holy Laws of Islam. One of 'Ala' ad-Din's 
ablest commanders, Malik Kafur, a Hindu convert from 
Gujarat, organized numerous expeditions to South India 
from 1302 to 1311, even attacking the city of Madurai, the 
seat of the Pandyas. But disturbances in the northern Rajput 
kingdoms once again weakened the Sultanate's hold, and 
the campaign was ultimately unsuccessful. The Tughluq 
dynasty (1325-98) replaced the Khaljis and continued the 
efforts to annex the whole of the southern peninsula, but 
with the establishment of the Hindu kingdom of Vijayanagar 
in 1336 — the dominant power in the south for the next two 
centuries — the Sultanate dream of empire came to an end. 

The sultans earned India's gratitude by staving off the 
Mongol scourge, which would have been far grimmer than 
Timur's horrific sack of Delhi in 1398. Although in 1241 
the Mongols raided and destroyed Lahore, establishing an 
encampment just beyond her borders that was an omni- 
present threat for half a century, paradoxically they stimu- 
lated a major cultural flowering. Iltutmish and his successors 
welcomed the scholars, poets, architects, and master crafts- 
men who had fled Mongol persecution in Khorasan, Iran, 
c Iraq, and Afghanistan. Many of the new arrivals were not 
Turks but Tajiks, Persian-speaking intellectuals whose tal- 
ents as administrators as well as litterateurs were put to use. 
But these urban sophisticates were not always welcomed 
by the soldierly and spirited Turks, and conflicts led to 
bloody feuds. 

From the works of chroniclers and historians attached 
to the cosmopolitan court at Delhi, we know that political 
institutions and practices under the Sultanate, though mod- 
eled after other regional monarchies ruled by Turks and 
Afghans, evolved in response to Indian conditions. Hindu 
rulers, if they paid fealty to the sultans, were welcome at 
such festive royal activities as hunts, polo games, parades, 



118 



and animal combats, which in many instances derived from 
Rajput customs. Eventually, many Hindus spoke Persian 
and cultivated the graceful manners of Iranian culture. 
Lesser nobles continued to enjoy local power under Muslim 
suzerainty, and many Hindus found posts in the adminis- 
trative system. 

Conversion to Islam sometimes came about by inter- 
marriage, but far more subtly persuasive was the implica- 
tion that acceptance of Islam led to success at court and in 
the marketplace. The pre-Islamic tradition in India of gurus 
(religious teachers) and sannyasis (ascetics) prepared the 
way for the acceptance of Muslim pirs and shaikhs. The 
Sufis, Muslim mystics who advocated ascetic practices and 
intense love of God, and whose delight in poetry and music 
created a highly emotional approach to religion, attracted 
many Hindus. Sufi doctrines of union with God through 
loving devotion seem to have influenced the growth of the 
already existing Hindu cult of bhakti, with its emphasis on 
love as the basis of the relationship with God, and bhakti in 
turn lent imagery to Indian Sufi poetry. Indeed, if the two 
religions ever achieved spiritual synthesis, it was through 
such figures as the mystic poet Kabir (1440-1518), accord- 
ing to legend a Hindu by birth but a Muslim by upbring- 
ing, who preached a religion of loving devotion that 
transcended all creedal differences. 

The most powerful unifying force in Islamic life and 
art has always been the Muslim faith itself. Muslims are a 
people of the book, and Islam demands a commitment to 
the revealed message of the Qur 5 an, the book of God and 
the conveyor of both spiritual and social law. The Qur 3 an, 
with the Hadith, the Sayings of the Prophet, forms the 
basis of the Holy Law which regulates all aspects of the life 
of every Muslim. Qur'anic law also prescribes an image of 
the cosmos, a total order made up of all the planes of 
human and material existence, within which the arts too 
are integrated. Contrary to popular belief, the Qur'an makes 
no specific pronouncements on the prohibition of repre- 
sentational art in Islam, but a few passages indicate that the 
Prophet Muhammad associated statues with pagan idols, 
and that God alone is the true mussawwir (creator) of life 
in all its forms. 

Within Islam are two main divisions, the Sunni ortho- 
doxy, based primarily in areas not influenced by Iran, and 
the Shi c a, the party of c Ali, cousin and son-in-law of the 
Prophet. The two divisions developed gradually on diver- 
gent lines although both adhere to the Qur'an and rely 
upon the Sunna, the way or example of the Prophet as 
reported in the Hadith. The Shi c ites believe that the rights 
of c Ali to the succession were unlawfully contravened by 
Abu Bakr and Umar, two in-laws of Muhammad, when 
they named themselves his two first successors, or caliphs. 
The Shi c ites developed the concept of the infallible imam, 
the leader of the community from among c Ali's descend- 
ants, sent by God to guide the faithful. According to 
mainstream Shi c ite philosophy, the twelfth imam disap- 
peared mysteriously in 873. Other Shi c ite groups, such 
as the Ismailis, believe in the presence of a living imam 
in our time. 

Twelver Shi c a was made the official state religion in 
Iran in 1501, under the Safavids, but already it had reached 
the Deccan. Although most of the Turkish and Afghan 
sultans and the Mughal emperors of India were Sunni, a 



new influx of Shi c ite nobles occurred in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries, and Hyderabad and Lucknow be- 
came strongholds of Shi c ite doctrine. 

With their religion, the Muslim sultans also brought 
to India the arts of calligraphy and manuscript illumination 
that already by 1200 had reached impressive heights in Egypt 
and Iran. Although not much has survived from the first 
two centuries of Muslim rule, perhaps because of the de- 
struction of Delhi by Timur in the late fourteenth century, 
it is likely that the early sultans replaced the indigenous 
Hindu and Jain tradition of painting on palm leaf with 
painting on paper imported from Iran. Under the Tughluqs 
and later under the Lodi dynasty (1451-1526), ateliers and 
workshops were set up at the imperial courts; Persian and 
Arabic texts were copied and illustrated in Iranian styles, 
although Indian characteristics became increasingly evi- 
dent. In one of the loveliest of all Sultanate manuscripts, 
the sixteenth-century Chandayana of Mulla Da 3 ud (see no. 
80), Iranian and Indian elements reflect a balanced synthesis. 

The Turko-Afghans brought with them, in addi- 
tion to the art of the book, new architectural ideas that 
were to transform the Indian landscape. The dome, the 
arch, and the minaret were hitherto unknown forms to 
Hindu builders, long accustomed to working in the indige- 
nous trabeate mode, in which space is spanned by means of 
beams laid horizontally. But the early Muslim settlers in- 
troduced the principle of the radiating arch, thus initiating 
a cooperation of indigenous and alien forms that was to 
evolve into one of the outstanding creative achievements 
of the Indo-Muslim period. Eventually, Sultanate experi- 
mentation gave way to a dynamic synthesis under the Mughal 
emperors. Perhaps more than in any other art form, the 
fusion of architectural forms and motifs inspired by the 
Delhi Sultanate symbolizes the nature of the pluralistic 
world inhabited by Hindus and Muslims under the sultans, 
especially during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. 



THE MUGHALS: 1526-1857 

India on the eve of the Mughal invasion was a country of 
uneasy political balance. The Lodi Afghans, under Sikandar 
Lodi (r. 1489-1517) and Ibrahim Lodi (r. 1517-26), held to- 
gether a large but restive empire that extended from the 
banks of the Indus River across the northern plains to the 
borders of Bengal and whose southern boundary was marked 
by the Chambal River. Hindu states through much of the 
north had lost sovereignty. Only the Rajput kingdoms of 
Rajasthan remained independent, but even here clan divi- 
sions and territorial and dynastic disputes weakened any 
effective opposition to the Afghan power in Delhi. In the 
Deccan, the Bahmanid Muslim kingdom, itself a successor 
state to the Delhi Sultanate but long debilitated by factional 
politics, was replaced in the early sixteenth century by the 
smaller independent states of Berar, Bidar, Ahmadnagar, 
Bijapur, and Golconda. Farther south, embracing what today 
are the states of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and Kerala, was 
the Hindu empire of Vijayanagar. The City of Victory, 
whose kings built massive multipillared temple complexes 
to their patron deity, Shiva, enjoyed its period of greatest 
prosperity during the reign of Krishnadeva Raya (1509-30), 



119 



but after this it was continually alert to the threat of attack 
from an alliance of the five sultanates of the Deccan. It 
finally collapsed in 1565. Meanwhile, Portuguese traders, 
coming to India by sea in the late fifteenth century, settled 
in Travancore and Calicut in the south and by 1510 had 
established themselves at Goa, halfway up the west coast, 
so beginning a long struggle for control of the maritime 
trade of India. 

In 1526, Babur, a Muslim prince from Fergana, now in 
Russian Turkistan, and descendant of the two great Cen- 
tral Asian conquerors, Timur and Chinghiz Khan, defeated 
Sultan Ibrahim Lodi at the Battle of Panipat, about fifty 
miles from Delhi, and declared himself ruler of India. Al- 
though his army was small, his men were able warriors. 
Skilled in the use of firearms and matchlocks, still a novelty 
in Indian warfare, they easily put to rout the Lodi sultan's 
mighty army of more than 100, 000 men. The following 
year, Babur took on the more formidable confederation of 
Rajput chiefs, briefly united under Rana Sanga of Me war, 
and defeated them at the momentous Battle of Kanhua, 
which ended the last hopes of the Rajputs to restore Hindu 
supremacy in northern India and established the Mughal 
dynasty on the throne of Delhi. By the time of Babur's 
death in 1530, he ruled an empire extending eastward from 
Badakhshan and Kabul through the Punjab to the borders 
of Bengal. 

Babur's grandson, Akbar, the third and greatest of the 
Mughal emperors, ascended the throne in 1556, at the age 
of fourteen. Much of Babur's domain had by this time 
been lost by his son Humay un (r. 1 530-56) to the Afghan 
rebel Sher Shah Sur. Humayun's reign was interrupted by a 
brief period of exile in 1544 at the Safavid court of Shah 
Tahmasp in Tabriz. This fact was to prove of immense 
significance to the history of Mughal painting in India, for 
when Humay un was able to regain his dominions in 1554, 
he brought with him two painters from the Iranian court, 
Mir Sayyid c Ali and c Abd as-Samad. Thus were introduced 
into India the latest developments in the Iranian book tradi- 
tion: high standards of calligraphy and illumination, drafts- 
manship of extreme refinement, the use of colored or gold- 
sprinkled paper, exquisitely illuminated and illustrated mar- 
gins, and decorated lacquer bindings. The large painting 
on cloth Princes of the House of Timur (no. 84 ) is the earliest 
known work by these Safavid artists for Humayun, and its 
style is wholly Iranian. 

The achievement of consolidating an empire that 
extended over half of India and of shaping the distinctive 
cultural traditions that have influenced her ever since be- 
longed to Akbar (r. 1556-1605). By initiating a remarkable 
series of Rajput alliances, culminating in his own marriage 
to a Jaipur princess, he pressed the Rajput chiefs into the 
service of the empire and by 1576 was master of all of 
Rajasthan, with the exception of Mewar. Gujarat was se- 
cured in 1573 and Bengal was attacked the following year, 
so that by the age of thirty-four Akbar ruled the whole of 
northern India from the Indus to the mouth of the Ganges 
and from the Himalayas to the Vindhya mountains on the 
edge of the Deccan plateau. 

The Mughal empire, as it continued to be ruled by 
his successors and as its power and grandeur became leg- 
endary in contemporary Europe, was the creation of Akbar. 
Unlike the Delhi sultans, whose kingdoms, however vast, 



were essentially held together by military might, Akbar 
established a central bureaucratic administrative system, 
controlled by himself. Its principal officers, the mansabdars 
(holders of command), ruled the twelve provinces into 
which the empire was then divided. This official aris- 
tocracy represented the imperial will and spread across the 
empire, like its impressive network of waterways and 
highways, to work the administrative machine. The 
provinces divided and subdivided into sarkars (districts) 
and parganas (subdistricts), and the division of authority 
penetrated the many levels of bureaucracy, with respon- 
sibilities assigned to both Hindus and Muslims. 

There is perhaps no surer documentation of the his- 
tory of Mughal rule, its dramas and vicissitudes, and of the 
colorful personalities of its talented sovereigns than the art 
they commissioned, much of which is seen in the follow- 
ing pages. The century and a quarter between Babur's in- 
vasion of India in 1526 and the death of his grandson Shah 
Jahan in 1666 saw the publication of two monumental 
autobiographies, the Turki Babur-nama (History of Babur) 
and the Persian Tuzuk-i Jahangiri (Memoirs of Jahangir), 
as well as two biographies, the A^in-i Akbari (Statutes 
of Akbar) by Abu 3 l-Fazl, court historian of Akbar, and 
the Padshah-nama (History of the Emperor), an official 
account of the reign of Shah Jahan by a pupil of Abu 3 l- 
Fazl's, c Abd al-Hamid Lahori. The Babur-nama, recording 
in detail the events of Babur's life, was translated into Persian 
and lavishly illustrated by court artists during Akbar's reign. 
Akbar's own biography, popularly known as the Akbar- 
nama, was illustrated in imperial albums commissioned by 
the emperor himself. These documented his heroic cam- 
paigns and reflected the interest in various religious faiths 
and cultures, including Hinduism, Zoroastrianism, Chris- 
tianity, and Judaism, that prevailed in the enlightened and 
cosmopolitan atmosphere of Akbar's court. The Memoirs of 
Jahangir, at once intimate, spontaneous, and connoisseurly, 
reveal that emperor's insatiable and somewhat eccentric 
interest in things, events, and people. The imperial copy of 
the Padshah-nama is the last of the great Mughal illustrated 
histories. Its text and paintings are almost exclusively limited 
to the great occasions of state — darbars, processions, and 
military campaigns — that reaffirmed the imperial status, 
and they reflect the refined but coldly formal taste of Shah 
Jahan himself. 

The great achievement of the Mughal period, the indi- 
vidual accomplishments of its legendary rulers notwith- 
standing, was the dynamic and dramatic synthesis it effected 
between indigenous and Islamic forms. While it would be 
unrealistic to expect a cultural fusion of the ideologies of 
Hinduism and Islam, we have already seen that bhakti and 
Sufi thought and practice influenced each other. In the 
new mystical system he founded, the Din-i Ilahi, Akbar 
went even further by making a deliberate effort to integrate 
facets of both faiths. Persian, the language of the Delhi 
Sultanate, became far more widely used because of the 
vast Mughal administrative network. Replacing Sanskrit 
as the official language, it came to be used by Hindu 
rulers and the Hindu ministerial class. But here too there 
was coalescence, represented by the emergence of a new 
language, Urdu, literally the camp-language. It was a com- 
bination of Hindi grammar with Persian and Arabic vocab- 
ulary and dated back to the late thirteenth century, when it 



120 



became the lingua franca of the Delhi Sultanate. In the 
course of time, Urdu became a court language, and even 
today in India it is considered the language of poets. In the 
arts, the early domination and eventual assimilation of 
Iranian forms can be traced in miniature painting of the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. In early Mughal archi- 
tecture, likewise, Iranian components are at once discernible. 

In 1658, Shah Jahan was deposed by his third son, 
Aurangzeb (r. 1658-1707), whose numerous military cam- 
paigns in the Deccan depleted the empire's resources. Puri- 
tanical and orthodox by nature, he offered little support to 
the court arts, and by the end of the seventeenth century 
many painters sought patrons at provincial centers in the 
Punjab Hills, Rajasthan, Oudh, and Bengal. The reign 
of the pleasure-loving and ineffectual Muhammad Shah 
(r. 1719-48) witnessed the collapse of central authority, the 
sack of Delhi in 1739 by the Iranians under Nadir Shah, 
and the emergence of Maratha power in the south. From 
1748 to 1762, northern India was repeatedly invaded by the 
Afghans, while the Marathas, making a bid for the control 
of Delhi, devastated central and northern India. The west, 
meanwhile, was rocked by Rajput rebellions. But even as 
Mughal power continued its rapid decline, ending only 
with the deposition and exile of its last emperor, Bahadur 
Shah II, in 1857, no indigenous power emerged that was 
capable of restoring its administrative authority. A vacuum 
was thus created, into which a wholly new power was to 
step. British dominion, slowly on the increase since the 
mid-eighteenth century, evolved into the virtual assump- 
tion of full authority throughout India by 1820 and cul- 
minated in the rule of empire that was to open India 
irrevocably to the impact of the West. 

THE SULTANS OF THE DECCAN: 
ca. 1500-1686 

The emergence in the fourteenth century of independent 
kingdoms in the Deccan and in South India (notably 
Vijayanagar) was directly related to the failure of the Delhi 
Sultanate to control the southern regions. In 1347, a Turkish 
governor of the Deccan revolted and founded the indepen- 
dent Bahmanid dynasty, which was to rule the northern 
Deccan for two centuries, with its capital first at Gulbarga 
(1347-1422) and later at Bidar (1422-1512). Imposing 
architectural remains at both sites attest to the wealth and 
culture of the Bahmanid sultans, though no manuscripts, 
miniatures, or metalwork are known from their courts. 
The gradual decline of the Bahmanid kingdom and the rise 
to power of Vijayanagar under Krishnadeva Raya were 
parallel developments. Undermined since the late fifteenth 
century by the repeated thrusts, province by province, of 
Vijayanagar's armies, the Bahmanid kingdom eventually 
splintered into five separate sultanates. First to break off 
was Berar, under a Hindu convert named Fathullah C I mad- 
Shah, who declared his independence in 1484. The c Imad- 
Shahis were absorbed by the sultanate of Ahmadnagar in 
1574. Ahmadnagar itself was founded by Malik Ahmad, 
the son of a Hindu slave converted to Islam and the gover- 
nor of Junnar under the Bahmanids until he declared his 
independence in 1490. Yusuf c Adil-Shah, Bahmanid gov- 
ernor of Bijapur, followed his example in the same year. 



According to the historian Ferishta, who wrote the definitive 
History of Muhammadan Power in India while serving at the 
court of Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II in the late sixteenth century, 
the founder of the c Adil-Shahi dynasty of Bijapur was the 
younger son of the Ottoman Sultan Murad II, who fled 
Turkey at the time of the accession of his brother, Sultan 
Muhammad II. Golconda developed in the ruins of the 
Hindu kingdom of Warangal, which had been defeated by 
the Bahmanids in 1424. It was founded by Quli Qutb- 
Shah, who was descended from the Turkman rulers of 
Tabriz and was governor of Telangana under the Bahmanids. 
He set up his own state in 1512. The three major sultanates 
— Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, and Golconda — belonged to the 
Shi c a sect of Islam and maintained close political and cul- 
tural relations with the Safavid dynasty of Iran (1501-1722) 
against the Sunni Mughal empire of northern India. Part of 
Ahmadnagar fell to Akbar in 1600, and Bijapur and Golconda 
were captured by Aurangzeb in 1686-87. 

Except for a period of about four decades (1687-1724) 
following its conquest by the Mughals under Aurangzeb, 
the Deccan remained politically independent ot northern 
India until the twentieth century. As a result it evolved, 
within an Islamic context, its own distinctive cultural mi- 
lieu and artistic styles. Its population was a mixture of 
Indian Muslims and Hindus, and Turks, Persians, Arabs, 
and Africans. The Arab link, notably absent in northern 
India, had been forged through centuries of trade across the 
Arabian Sea with Egypt, Yemen, and c Iraq, making the 
Deccan, until the Mughal conquest of 1687, one of the 
great centers of Arabic learning outside the Middle East. 

There was, in addition, the proximity of the Hindu 
South. The Deccani sultanates, constantly engaged in petty 
squabbles against each other, combined efforts only once in 
their regrettably short-lived history when, in 1565, they 
disposed of the kingdom of Vijayanagar. Following its fall, 
it is likely that many Hindu painters and craftsmen from 
that wondrous city were recruited to the capitals of the 
Deccani sultans, taking with them traditions that derived 
from the early pre-Muslim styles of classical India. This 
new influx may have been something in the nature of a 
catalyst, for after this date a great flowering of miniature 
painting occurred at Ahmadnagar, Bijapur, and Golconda, 
the earlier Iranian styles giving way to superb master- 
pieces reflecting the new, typically Deccani conventions of 
line and gorgeous color. 

While the Nizam-Shahi sultans of Ahmadnagar are 
accepted as the earliest and most original of the Deccani 
patrons, the c Adil-Shahis of Bijapur and the Qutb-Shahis of 
Golconda also commissioned important works. The most 
outstanding single patron was Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II of 
Bijapur (r. 1580-1626), who maintained a court rich in its 
patronage of music, literature, and the arts where Iranian 
and Mughal artists were welcomed. Lush landscapes, both 
subtle and splendid, and sumptuous colors touched with 
gold to catch the light give Bijapuri painting its mysteri- 
ously lyrical and introspective character. After 1636, when 
Bijapur came under Mughal control, the mature style of 
Mughal portraiture increasingly influenced contemporary 
work at Bijapur and Golconda. Appropriate to the lavish 
style tavored in life by this intensely creative and romantic 
ruler is the vast complex of his tomb and the adjoining 
mosque, known as the Ibrahim Rauza (see fig. 6, page 453). 



Architecturally, the Ibrahim Rauza is an example of the 
new forms initiated by the JBijapur sultans, combining tomb, 
mosque, and a cistern for ablutions all situated together on 
a plinth. The tomb structure itself reflects another Bijapuri 
innovation, the surrounding of the square monument of 
the tomb by a pillared arcade. 

At Golconda, where the reign of Sultan Muhammad- 
Quli Qutb-Shah (1580-1612) ushered in a period of great 
luxury and splendor, painting continued in a mixture of 
Safavid, Turkish, and Mughal styles, always retaining ech- 
oes of the Turkman origins of this dynasty. Better known, 
perhaps, than the miniatures that scholars only recently 
have begun to assign specifically to Golconda are its paint- 
ings on cotton for use as curtains, wall hangings, and floor 
spreads. Created for export in the seventeenth and eigh- 
teenth centuries, these were covered with landscape and 
figural designs drawn not only from Indian and Iranian 
but from Chinese and European decorative conventions. 
Like Bijapur, Golconda evolved an independent architectural 
style, most in evidence today in the city of Hyderabad. 

After the Mughals conquered the Deccan in 1686-87, 
the artistic traditions of Bijapur and Golconda, already on 
the wane from the 1650s, were finally disrupted. Hyderabad, 
emerging as an independent kingdom in 1724, became a 
new center of artistic patronage, its paintings combining 
the flamboyant flavor of the former Golconda school with 
the increasing rigidity of the provincial Mughal style. Fol- 
lowing the collapse of centralized Mughal authority in the 
eighteenth century, other independent states were estab- 
lished in the Deccan, Bengal, and Oudh, ruled by powerful 
nobles who patronized art forms that increasingly were a 
blend of late Mughal and European elements. In this last 
phase of the great Mughal empire, its provincial courts 
paid only nominal allegiance to Delhi, a poignant throw- 
back to the Delhi Sultanate on the eve of Babur's historic 
invasion. India's new masters, carrying her into the mod- 
ern age, were the British. Unlike the Muslim rulers, they 
did not stay. But their impact was to be as profound as that 
of any of their predecessors. 



U2 



THE 

DELHI SULTANATE 



The munificent Muslim sultans who ruled the Deccan in the Middle Ages 
prided themselves on attracting the best available literary and artistic talent 
to their courts, and they also kept in close touch with cultural developments 
in the central Islamic lands. Among the scholars, poets, and artists they 
welcomed each year from Iran, Turkey, and Arabia were calligraphers who 
worked alongside local scribes and artisans to create both architectural in- 
scriptions and illuminated manuscripts for the royal libraries. Some of the 
finest inscriptions that have survived at Bidar, which served as the capital of 
the Bahmanid dynasty from 1424 until its demise in 1538, were composed 
in Arabic by a Persian calligrapher in the 1430s and executed in stone by 
craftsmen who spoke only the vernacular Telegu. The inscriptions are in 
Thuluth, one of several styles of cursive Arabic script that were developed 
in Baghdad between the tenth and the thirteenth century and became known 
as classical. Calligraphers aspiring to master the classical method of writing 
Arabic were taught to practice the circles, arcs, and measuring dots that 
governed the shape of each letter of the alphabet before attempting to write 
whole words. In a text written in classical Thuluth, Naskhi, Nasta c liq, 
Muhaqqaq, or Rihani script, each word is an artistic, harmonious construc- 
tion of perfectly formed individual characters. 

This Qur'an, illuminated with a breadth and magnificence that sug- 
gests it was copied for a patron of high rank at one of the princely courts, is 
apparently the only manuscript to survive from the Bahmanid period, which 
began about 1350. Although it was written in the late fifteenth century, long 
past the peak of Bahmanid power, the manuscript, with its stately open- 
ing page, seems as sturdy as the great fort at Daulatabad. Sustained by the 
force of the holy verses themselves, the dynamic script seems imbued with 
conviction. The style is Bihari, which has been used by calligraphers in 
India since the early Middle Ages. On the opposite fringes of the world of 
Islam, in North Africa and Spain, scribes also wrote Arabic texts in a style 
of their own, called Maghribi. In Bihari, the characters are wedge-shaped, 
more angular than the classical rounded forms, and writers of both Bihari 
and Maghribi script depart from the rules by treating each word not as a 
carefully constructed sum of its letters but as an entity in itself. What could 
be seen as a lack of classical perfection and harmony in Bihari and Maghribi 
texts is often more than offset by the vigor of the writing and the sometimes 
daring use of colorful decoration. 

The writing style may be particularly Indian, but the design of these 
pages, a forceful arrangement of two lines of large script alternating with 



71. 

QUR'AN 

Sultanate, Deccan, dated a.h. 888 (1438) 
Opaque watercolor and gold on paper, 
18V4 x 12>/4 in. (47.6x31.1 cm.) 
Archaeological Museum, Bijapur (912) 



Overleaf, 71 t> 



three of small, has been borrowed from classical texts. Muslim scribes took 
great pride in writing the Qur'an as artfully as possible and in inventing 
eye-catching calligraphic designs for copies of the sacred book. This design, 
which became very popular in Ottoman Turkey for single pages of religious 
poetry or the Prophetic Traditions (Hadith), seems to have originated in the 
early fifteenth century. The idea may have come from medieval Arab poets, 
who often inserted their own verses between the lines of classical, preferably 
religious, poems, the so-called takhmis. Two lines of original poetry writ- 
ten in large script would be followed by three lines of secondary poetry, in 
smaller script, enlarging on the classical text. The traditional designers used 
two distinct styles of script, always in the same combinations: the large 
script was usually Thuluth, the small Naskhi, but on rare occasions two 
lines in large Muhaqqaq preceded three in small Rihani. The Deccani artist 
who transcribed this Qur'an has applied the same technique, which he no 
doubt learned from a Persian or Turkish colleague, but he has written both 
the large and small script in his accustomed Bihari style. 



72. 

CHESSMAN 

Inscribed, on the bottom: "from the work ot 
Yusuf al-Bahlili" 

Sultanate, northwestern India, late 11th or 
early 12th century 
Ivory, height 6'/s in. (15.5 cm.) 
Bibliotheque Nationale, Pans, Cabinet des 
Medailles (Chab. 3271) 



With a hf.rce battle raging about him, a proud, mustachioed nobleman, 
perhaps a king, sits with remarkable poise on the howdah of his war elephant. 
The angry-eyed beast, a great battle tank, lumbers into the melee, flanked by 
four horsemen, ensnaring an enemy rider in its crushing trunk, while the 
mahout, gymnastically pitched forward from his seat atop the elephant, 
attacks from above, tugging at the rider's hand even as he holds on for dear 
life. Nothing could better represent the mighty grandeur of the Indian sul- 
tans than this forceful chess piece carved from a cross section of a great 
elephant tusk. The carving is packed with detail: one of the horses, tor 
instance, his head bowing animatedly, is crested with a superbly simplified 
bird, and battle-axes, swords, jewels, costumes, and horse and elephant 
caparisons are all precisely noted. The relief around the outer edge ot the 
howdah, a repeat pattern of foot soldiers brandishing swords and shields, 
bespeaks the caliber of the stout but muscular occupant, whose triumph 
over the enemy is implied by the twisted limbs crushed beneath the elephant's 
hind legs. Warmly patinated over the centuries, the noble ivory has also 
suffered the buffets of time. The front part of the base has split off, as have 
the legs of the endangered horseman's steed, and fragments of an arm and a 
leg on the top of the elephant's head suggest there was once a second mahout. 

Although this chessman, either the king or a rook of what must have 
been a staggering set, has long been recognized as a masterpiece ot great 
artistic and historical importance, its provenance has never been definitely 
established, and it has been assigned dates ranging from the eighth century 
to the fifteenth. Few would now make the claim, but Souren Mehkian- 
Chirvani reminds us that in the nineteenth century the piece was widely 
believed to have been part of a set presented as a gift to Emperor Charle- 
magne by the fifth Abbasid caliph, Harun ar-Rashid, who ruled from Baghdad 
between 786 and 809. That it was listed in the 1505 inventory of the treasury 
of the royal abbey at Saint-Denis, France, where it had been preserved, 
immediately after a now lost ivory chess game that was recorded as having 
belonged to Charlemagne probably accounts for the contusion. 

Melikian-Chirvani points out that the piece itself contains several clues 
which may provide at least a tentative solution to the complex puzzle ot 
where and when it was made, though he is careful to reserve final judgment 
until a more exhaustive study has been done. The signature in Arabic on the 
carving's underside, for example, which reads, "from the work of Yusuf 
al-Bahlili," indicates that the date cannot be later than the end of the elev- 
enth or the beginning of the twelfth century: neither the style of the plain 
Kutic lettering nor the signing formula "from the work of" was in general 
use by the twelfth century. Although aesthetically this object has nothing to 
do with Iranian art as we know it, several details provide links to the eastern 
Iranian world. The armed footmen encircling the howdah wear boots of an 
early eastern Iranian type, and their stylized marching position- 



-one lesi 



726 



72 



straight, the other bent at a right angle — also closely follows an Iranian 
convention. Even more telling are the standard Iranian horse trappings: the 
stirrups, the disks hanging from the straps, and the rectangular saddle cloths, 
which occur on representations of horses on Sassanid silverware and on 
vessels associated with prc-lslamic Central Asia and eastern Khorasan. Based 
on this and other evidence he has gathered so far, Mclikian-Chirvani con- 
cludes that it is reasonable to suggest that the chessman was made in the late 
eleventh or early twelfth century at a center in northwestern India where 
Iranian military equipment was used, probably in some dependency of the 
Ghaznevid sultanate. After the conquests of Mahmud of Ghazni, who reigned 
from 998 to 1030, the Ghaznevid sultans, from their capital at Ghazni in 
what is today Afghanistan, ruled a kingdom stretching from the Tigris to 
the Ganges that endured until 1173, when it was overrun by Muhammad 
of Ghor. 

Published: Barrett, "A Group of Medieval Ivories," no. 42, pi. xvn; Arts de i'lslam, 
p. 187, no. 267; Kiihnel, Die islamischen Etfaibeinskulptureu, pp. 30-31, no. 17, pi. vi 
(showing the base), pi. vn; L'lslam dans les collections nationals, pp. 174, 176, no. 377; 
Tardy, Les Ivoires, p. 153, no. 5; M. Pal, Crafts, no. 42, pi. xvn. 



73. 

RUSTAM THROWN INTO THE SEA BY 
THE DEMON AKVAN 
From the Schulz Shah-nama (Book of Kings) 
Sultanate, Delhi or Malwa, first half of 
14th century 

Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 8 X 5 3 / s in. (20.3 x 13.7 cm.) 
Miniature: 1% X 4 X A in. (4.8 X 10.8 cm.) 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
Bequest of Monroe C. Gutman (1974.290.17) 



Cheered on by a squawking duck, Rustam — the principal champion of 
Firdausi's great eleventh-century Iranian epic the Shah-nama (Book of Kings) 
— fights for his life. In this episode Rustam, exhausted by his strenuous 
search for the terrible div Akvan, lies down for a nap. As Rustam sleeps, the 
div comes upon him, and with devilish care cuts out the turf around him 
and lifts him, ground and all, into the air. With gentlemanly consideration, 
Akvan then asks Rustam whether he would prefer to be flung to his death 
onto the mountaintops or drowned in the deep sea. Knowing that whichever 
he chooses, the demon will do the opposite, Rustam requests the former, 
whereupon Akvan tosses him into the sea. After battling with crocodiles, 
Rustam swims to freedom. 

The artist portrays the scene with the utmost humor and economy. 
Akvan's arms have barely released his victim, yet his optimistic face is already 
shadowed by a hint of dismay. The jumble of waves calms obediently where 
Rustam swims, and although the weeds just beyond the nasty, lionesque 
water creature stab aggressively at the hero, the blossoms near him peep out 
in tender encouragement. 

All the known miniatures from the manuscript to which this painting 
belongs, called the Schulz Shah-nama after the distinguished German scholar 




who once owned it, are in The Metropolitan Museum of Art. They are the 
best drawn, among the most vigorous, and probably the earliest of surviv- 
ing pictures from the Sultanate period. The date of the miniatures can be 
hazarded on the basis of related early fourteenth-century material usually 
associated with Iran, a group that includes two now dispersed copies of the 
Shah-nama in a similar small format and illustrated in an equally lively but 
more fastidious style, with less stocky figures. 1 

Inasmuch as paintings of the early Sultanate period in India are extremely 
rare, one can do no more than speculate on the provenance of the Schulz 
Shah-nama. The bright, flat colors, with large areas of vermilion, look ahead 
to seventeenth-century pictures from Malwa, in Central India, which was 
annexed by 'Ala 3 ad-Din Khalji (r. 1296-1316) in 1305 and continued to be 
governed from Muslim Delhi until it became independent in 1401, three 
years after Timur's sack of Delhi. In all likelihood these small pictures belong 
either to the Khalji tradition or to that of the Tughluqs who succeeded them 
in 1320. They were probably painted either in Delhi or at Malwa, where the 
style spawned many stylistic descendants. The artist is likely to have been 
trained in Iran and to have undergone an emboldening change of style after 
he came to India. Already strongly Indian are the ruggedly patterned vermil- 
ion sky, the large flowers reminiscent of Western Indian painting, the well- 
observed elephants (which are unknown in Iranian painting), and the 
exhilarating overall gusto. 

1. For the two small Shah-nama manuscripts, see: Simpson, The Illustrations of an 
Epic; Robinson, "A Survey of Persian Painting," p. 21; Robinson, 'Areas of 
Controversy." For another group of Shah-nama illustrations (Staatsbibliothek 
Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin), which stands midway between the Schulz Shah- 
nama and the other two small manuscripts, see: Ipsiroglu, Saray-Alben, pi. 1, figs. 1, 
2; pi. 2, figs. 3-5; pi. 3, fig. 6. 

Published: Schulz, Die persisch-islamische Miniaturmalerei, vol. 1, p. 14, vol. 2, pi. 14; 
Pope, A Survey of Persian Art, vol. 3, p. 1834, vol. 5, pt. 2, pi. 832e; Dimand, 'An 
Exhibition," p. 85; Grube, Muslim Miniature Painting, p. 29, no. 20. 




74 



The Indian genius for working in stone, so renowned under Hindu and 
Buddhist patronage, was applied in very different ways under the Muslim 
rulers, as is apparent in this dedicatory slab from a mosque in Bengal. The 
inscription, worked with chisels, files, and abrasives, begins with words 
taken from the Hadith, or Prophetic Traditions: "The Prophet, the blessing 
of God and peace be upon him, said, 'Whosoever builds a mosque for God, 
God will build for him a palace the like of it in Paradise.' In the reign of 
Sultan c Ala 3 ad-Dunya waM-Din Abu 3 l-Muzaffar Husain Shah al-Sultan, may 



74. 

DEDICATORY INSCRIPTION FROM A 
MOSQUE 

Sultanate, Bengal, Gaur, dated a. h. 905 (1500) 

Schist, 16'/« X 45 3 /8 in. (41 x 115.3 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 

Purchase, Gift of Mrs. Nelson Doubleday and 

Bequest of Charles R. Gerth, by exchange 

(1981.320) 



129 



God perpetuate his rule and sovereignty, Prince Daniyal, may his honor 
endure, built this congregational mosque on the tenth of DhuH-Hijja of 
a. h. 905 [July 7, 1500]." 

Composed in Arabic and written in a special Bengali variant of the 
Tughra script known as "bow and arrow," the inscription is still as legible as 
it is visually arousing. Designed within a long rectangle by a master calligra- 
pher whose sensitivity to rhythm and proportion recalls a painting by Uccello, 
Mondrian, or Gris, it brings to mind an army of the faithful on the march, 
their standards raised high over a bustling throng of horsemen and elephants. 

According to Annemarie Schimmel, the slab illustrates a particularly 
successful example of the "rhythmic parallelism" cited by Richard Etting- 
hausen and Irma L. Fraad as characteristic of Indian calligraphy: "Vertical 
hastae [have been] elaborated into a regular pattern that is then interrupted 
and shaped regularly by the long backward strokes of the letter ya and super- 
imposed kaf, a feature also found in predominantly Indian manuscripts. A 
bowlike design is achieved by placing the round letter nun in the upper register. 
Regularity is rarely, if ever, achieved; at best, five hastae are grouped into 
one unit. Our stone has exactly sixty verticals of equal length, through which 
five 'bows' are set, each comprising twelve hastae with two very minor 
variants. The central 'bow' consists of two superimposed, slightly rounded 
wide letters; each of the other four 'bows' has a straight horizontal letter, 
forming a kind of bowstring. The pattern thus assumes a perfect harmony, 
and can be considered the finest of all published inscriptions from Bengal." 1 

With the weakening of the sultanate of Delhi, the provincial governors 
became independent, not only politically but culturally. In Bengal various 
dynasties replaced the Delhi governorships between 1340 and 1526, when 
the first Mughal emperor, Babur, entered the Indian scene. Particularly ad- 
mired among the Bengali kings was c Ala 3 ad-Din Husain Shah (r. 1493-1518), 
a Sayyid of Arab descent. Husain Shah was made king after the tyrannical 
Shams ad-Din Muzaffar Shah, a former slave from Abyssinia under whom 
Husain had served as vizier, was deposed and slain. During his long rule, 
Bengal prospered. At the capital, Gaur, and in other parts of Bengal, he and 
his family built splendid mosques, tombs, and palaces, some of which have 
survived. Simon Digby, who first translated the inscription, has identified 
Prince Daniyal, who built the mosque for which this piece was the dedica- 
tory inscription, as one of Husain Shah's eighteen sons. The tomb of Shah 
Nafa at Monghyr, dated 1497, also bears the prince's name. During the 
nineteenth century, Gaur became a quarry for contractors from Calcutta, 
and it was probably then that this stone was carried off and in due course 
sent to England. 

1. Schimmel, in Notable Acquisitions 1981-1982, pp. 13-14. 

Published: Digby, "The Fate of Daniyal," jpl. i; Notable Aoquisitions\1981-1982,\pp. 
13-14; Skelton and Francis, Arts of Bengal, pp. 30-31, no. 33. 



75. 

BAZUR THE TURANIAN WIZARD 
From a manuscript of the Shah-nama 
(Book of Kings) of Firdausi 
Sultanate, ca. 1430-35 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 7 3 A X 8 l /s in. 
(19.7X20.6 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
Bequest of William Milne Grinnell (20.120.246) 



The long struggle between the Turanians and the Iranians is a continuing 
theme through much of the Shah-nama. Numerous armies of countless pala- 
dins stain endless fields with their blood. At times, supernatural techniques 
heighten the encounters. Here, the warlock Bazur, at the order of the Turanian 
commander in chief, Piran, ascends a mountain and casts spells to engulf 
the Iranians in darkness, cold, and dense snow. The devastating weather 
issues in vigorous noxious squiggles from the yogilike shaman's bottle, pro- 
ducing ornamental blobs of snow that have already begun to disturb the 
intrepid Iranian cavalry and make some of the hidden grotesques in the 
craggy mountains shiver. 

The dispersed manuscript from which this miniature comes has been 
recognized since the 1950s as being from one of the sultanates. Well before 
1430, painting from what might be described as the Turkish-Iranian tradi- 
tion was being carried out in many fresh sultanate idioms at centers in Kashmir, 
the Punjab, Delhi, Bengal, Malwa, Gujarat, and the Deccan. These workshops 
were often staffed not only by Indians but by artists trained in Iran at Shiraz, 



130 




Tabriz, Herat, or even beyond, who adjusted their styles to the more intense 
Indian cultural clime. Neither this manuscript nor a related Shah-nama, of 
about 1450, also dispersed, can be assigned a precise provenance. 1 

1. For the related Shah-nama of ca. 1450, see: Fraad and Ettinghausen, "Sultanate 
Painting," fig. 152. 



Few objects better reveal the synthesis between imported Islamic forms 
and shapes indigenous to India. A typical zoomorphic incense burner of the 
sort made by the Seljuk Turks has undergone an Indian metamorphosis: 1 the 
erstwhile highly stylized lion mask has taken on the pop-eyed and horned 
aspect of the apotropaic kirttimukha, the "face of glory" associated with 
Lord Shiva, and the lion's salutatory right paw and the tonguelike folds on 
his neck, pierced beneath the edges to allow smoke to escape, are also Indian 
adaptations. Rows of similarly saluting leonine beasts add their august prcs- 



76. 

INCENSE BURNER IN THE FORM 
OF A LION 

Sultanate, Deccan, 15th century 

Bronze, height 6Vh in. (17.5 cm.) 

Fogg Art Museum, Harvard University, 

Cambridge, Massachusetts, Purchase, Friends 

of the Fogg Art Museum (1964.44) 



131 



dices to The Throne of Prosperity, folio 191 of the Nujum al-'Ulum (Stars 
of Science), a manuscript dated 1570-71 that was in the royal library of 
Bijapur, where it was probably written and illustrated. 2 Like the incense burn- 
er, many of the Nujum al- c Ulnm miniatures fuse Muslim and Hindu motits. 

The lion's tongue, wobbling on a pivot, is a humorous Indian touch, 
reminiscent of the tongues on a pair of large stone waterspouts in the form 
of grotesque water monsters that are now in the Archaeological Museum ot 
Bijapur. The incense burner's lid, which was attached to the animal's tail, is 
now missing, and the left rear leg is a wooden substitute. 

1. For a Seljuk prototype, see: Pope, A Survey of Persian Art, vol. 6, pi. 1304. 

2. For the Nujum al- c llluin, see: Arnold, The Library of A. Chester Beatty, vol. 2, pi. 4. 



77. 

ROCK-CRYSTAL ELEPHANT 
Sultanate, Deccan, late 15th— 16th century 
Rock crystal, with 16th-century European 
mounts in gold and enamel, height 2 7 /« in. 
(7.3 cm.) 

Kunsthistorisches Museum, Sammlung fur 
Plastik und Kunstgewerbe, Vienna (2320) 



This recumbent rock-crystal elephant is the first of the objects and pic- 
tures here to have reached the West. Because it is unique and because rock 
crystal takes on no signs of age, it is also one of the hardest to place in time. 
The object is clearly Indian in style and workmanship. The carving could 
only have been done by a lapidary aware of the way Indian elephants look 
and move: after studying the animal's exceptional — and very obliging — pose, 
he abstracted it, echoing the pleasing roundness of head and trunk in the 
almost circular space between trunk and chest. Inasmuch as there are no 
signs of Mughal naturalism, which would have lent individuality, sugges- 
tions of texture, and greater accuracy of proportion, the piece is almost 
certainly of Sultanate manufacture. The gold and enamel mounts were added 
in Europe during the sixteenth century, when the elephant was fashioned 
into a saltcellar. 

The elephant once belonged to the younger brother of Hapsburg Em- 
peror Maximilian II, Archduke Ferdinand of Tirol (1520-1595), who was a 
notable collector in the days of the Wuuderkammer and Kunstkammcr (cabinets 
of curiosities and arts), the forerunners of modern museums. The archduke 
began acquiring systematically while serving as regent at Prague. At Ambras, 
his castle near Innsbruck, he arranged and installed his remarkable discoveries, 
which included many objects from Asia gathered through his family's diplo- 
matic and commercial contacts. His favorite objects were kept on the shelves of 
eighteen very large cabinets, one of which contained rock-crystal elephants, 
horn goblets, coconuts, muscat nuts, and bezoar stone amulets and cups, 
most of which were set in European mountings. 

Archduke Ferdinand's Indian material probably came through Goa, which 
enjoyed close relations with the Deccani sultans. This plump, benevolent 





77 



pachyderm bears stylistic affinities to later Deccani depictions of elephants, 
such as that of Atash Khan, painted for Sultan Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II of 
Bijapur (no. 194), and we are strongly inclined to assign it to one of the 
sultanates of the Deccan, perhaps to the Bahmanid dynasty that ruled from 
1345 until the first quarter of the sixteenth century. It is very likely that 
many objects made for the pre-Mughal sultans have been incorrectly assigned 
to Muslim centers outside India. 

Published: Born, "Some Eastern Objects from the Hapsburg Collections," p. 275, 
pi. nn; Lach, A Century of Wonder, p. 27, pi. 9. 



In India, worldly pleasures were often explored as diligently as otherworldly 
pursuits. We have a hedonistic father and son to thank for the renowned 
Ni c mat-nama (Book of Delicacies) to which this miniature belongs. The Ni c mat- 
tiama, one of the few such books on gastronomy and related matters to 
survive, was commissioned by Ghiyath ad-Din Khalji of Malwa (r. 1469—1500) 
and expanded for his son Nasir ad-Din Khalji (r. 1500-1511). The manuscript 
contains fifty miniatures relating to cookery and the preparation of 
aphrodisiacs, drinks, and perfumes. 1 No men are to be seen in the pictures 
other than the sultan, who surrounded himself with women who attended 
to his every need. He is reputed to have kept in his harem some fifteen 
hundred women, whom he educated not only in singing and dancing but 
also in such matters as finance and the military arts. 



78. 

THE SULTAN'S LADIES FLAVORING 
WATER 

From a manuscript of the Ni c mat-nama 
(Book of Delicacies) of Nasir ad-Din Shah 
Sultanate, Malwa, ca. 1495-1505 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 10% X 7'/ 2 in. (27.5 X 19 cm.) 
Miniature: 8Vh x 5V2 in. (20.5 x 14 cm.) 
The British Library, India Office Library and 
Records, London (Persian ms. no. 149) 




The Ni c mat-nama manuscript was copied in a bold Indian variety of 
Naskhi script and illustrated in a local variant of a well-known Iranian idiom 
described by B. W. Robinson as the "Turkman style," which seems to have 
been centered at Shiraz but was widely disseminated. - Merchants sold 
manuscripts illustrated in this manner far and wide, and considerable numbers 
of painters trained to practice it found employment at courts as distant as 
Turkey and India. In this picture the dragonish clouds, formulaic flowers, 
tidily brushed outlines, and bright, clear colors, as well as the scale of the 
figures and their relationship to the landscape, owe much to the Turkman 
mode. But the ornamentally patterned leaves on the tree and the ground are 
as Indian as the cooking pots, bringing to mind not only Indian textile pat- 
terns but also the enticing and alluring compositions Indian sellers of pan 
still devise for their displays of the lustrous and delicate leaves in which betel 
nut and supari are wrapped. The large-eyed ladies silhouetted in Malwa 
costume, one of them waving a large Indian fan, reveal the influence of the 
indigenous style that is also apparent in Bilhana Makes Love with Champavati 
(no. 227), painted some fifty years later. 

1. For a discussion of the Nicmat-nama and other published illustrations from it, see: 
Skelton, "The Ni c mat nama"; Barrett and Gray, Painting of India, pp. 60-61; 
Khandalavala and Chandra, New Documents of Indian Painting, pp. 58-64, pis. 11, 12, 
figs. 131-39; Losty, The Art of the Book, p. 67, no. 41. 

2. Robinson, "Origin and Date." 

Published: Skelton, "The Ni c mat nama," no. 4. 



79. 

MANUSCRIPT: BUSTAN (THE 
ORCHARD) OF SATJI (229 folios, 
43 miniatures) 
Scribe: Shahsuvar al-Katib 
Sultanate, Mandu, ca. 1500-1503 
National Museum, New Delhi (48.6/4) 

THE PATRIARCH ABRAHAM PLAYS HOST TO 

A FIRE WORSHIPER 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 13% X 9% in. (34.6 x 24.5 cm.) 

Miniature: 7% X 6Vh in. (19.4 x 16.2 cm.) 



The moralistic tales of Sa c di of Shiraz (ca. 1200-1290) amused and en- 
lightened readers throughout Islam, and several illustrated manuscripts of his 
Gulistan (The Rose Garden) and Bustan (The Orchard) were brilliantly illus- 
trated in India (see also no. 139). This illustration describes the humiliation 
of Abraham, a proudly hospitable old gentleman so keen to entertain a 
guest that when he sighted a frail, white-haired vagabond crossing the des- 
ert he invited him to dine. While grace was being said, Abraham noted his 
guest's silence, and he soon realized that the old fellow was a despised 
Zoroastrian. Outraged that his purity should be defiled by his eating with 
such a being, he forced the hungry old man back into the desert, whereupon 
an angel appeared and admonished him: "For a century God has provided 
this fire worshiper's daily bread, and now you presume to withhold the hand 
of bounty?" 

This copy of the Bustan was written in unusually bold but graceful 
Nasta'liq script by Shahsuvar al-Katib (Shahsuvar the Scribe) for Nasir ad- 
Din Khalji of Malwa (r. 1500-1511), the second patron of the Ni c mat-nama. 
Nasir ad-Din's name and honorifics are given within a shamsa on folio Ir. 
Inasmuch as the colophon page contains an inspection date of a.h. 908 
(1502-3), the manuscript must have been completed early in the sultan's 
reign. Inscriptions on folios 1 and 190r give the name of the painter and 
illuminator as the same Haji Mahmud, working at Mandu, who illustrated 
the Ni c mat-nama. The other forty-one pictures appear to be by the same 
workshop if not by the same hand. 

The stumpy trees on the horizon in some of the miniatures, the essen- 
tially logical handling of space and architecture, and the ornament and figural 
types reveal a faint but recognizable awareness of the work of Bihzad, the 
late Timurid master of Herat. As it is most unlikely that the Mandu patrons 
and artists had actually seen Bihzad's paintings, echoes of the great artist's 
style would have to have been transmitted at second or third hand. It is a 
tribute both to the power of Bihzad and to the level of artistic appreciation at 
Mandu that his invention reached so far. 1 



1. For a miniature of the sort that might have been the source of Bihzadian influences 
at Mandu, see: Sakisian, La Miniature persane, fig. 109. Marie Lukens Swietochowski 
has suggested that the artist of the Bustan was in this manuscript modifying exam- 
ples of a now lost early phase of Bukhara painting. 

Published: Ettinghausen, "The Bustan Manuscript," pp. 40-43; Manuscripts from Indian 
Collections, pp. 94-95; Losty, The Art of the Book, pp. 67-68, no. 42. 



134 



80 



80. 

LAUR FIGHTING IN THE FOREST 
From a manuscript of the Laur Chanda, or 
Chandayana (The Story of Chanda), of 
Mulla Da'ud 

Sultanate, 2nd quarter of 16th century 
Opaque watcrcolor on paper 
Folio: 7 5 /h x 5% in. (19.4 x 14.3 cm.) 
Miniature: 7¥n X 5 3 /h in. (18.8 X 13.6 cm.) 
Trustees of the Prince of Wales Museum of 
Western India, Bombay (57.1/32) 



While journeying through a forest, the hero Laur and his beloved Chanda 
rest beneath a tree, from whose branches Laur has suspended his buckler, 
when a gang of soldiers suddenly attacks them. Violence has rarely been 
painted more lyrically. The action unfolds beneath a sky of arabesques and a 
tree flowering with songbirds. Despite the impending slash of Laur's scimitar, 
his victim reclines with terpsichorean grace, either honored to be slam by so 
perfect a hero or unable to adjust his mood to life's reality. Like the fallen 
soldier, the artist seems to have been oblivious to the mundane — even more 
so than were the Iranian artists from whose style his took flight. The illustra- 
tions to this well-known manuscript of the Laur Chanda soar farther beyond 
the daily world than is usual even in Iranian art. The tree in this miniature 
brings to mind a lollipop craning to become a great rising full moon, the 
sky could be the work of a skilled embroiderer, and the flowers are scattered 
rhythmically as drumbeats. For the delectation of a passionately aesthetic 
patron, a happy, engaging view has vanquished everything inartistic or even 
slightly unpleasant. 

The Laur Chanda, or Chandayana (The Story of Chanda), was com- 
posed m the Avadhi dialect of Hindi in 1377-78 by Mulla Da 3 ud, who dedi- 
cated the story to Jahan Shah, vizier of Sultan Firoz Shah Tughluq of Delhi. 
Its popularity is attested to by the fact that in a field noted for a paucity of 
material, parts of at least five illustrated pre-Mughal copies of the romance 
have survived. Sixty-eight miniatures from this copy were acquired from 
Bhopal by the Prince of Wales Museu m in 1957. 1 Although opinions vary as 
to when they were painted, the date cannot be far from 1535 to 1540. The 



136 



Iranian elements (such as the tree trunk here, which looks back to compara- 
bly curved Turkman precursors) are no more than vestigial, and the female 
figures are painted in a style related to that of the Chaurapanchasika series, 
which has been dated to the mid-sixteenth century. Mandu, Malwa, Delhi, 
and Jaunpur have all been proposed as possible places of origin. Wherever 
they were painted, the pictures imply a patron who was not only interested 
in illustrated books but also devoted to other artistic pleasures. (See also 
no. 224.) 

1. See: Khandalavala and Chandra, New Documents, figs. 165-70, 172-75, pi. 24; 
Khandalavala and Chandra, "A Ms. of the Laur Chanda." 

Published: Losty, The Art oj the Book, p. 69, no. 45. 



One of India's contributions to the world is the fable book, the most re- 
nowned ot which is the classic Kalila wa Dimna, named after the two jackals 
whose exploits it recounts. The Leopard's Court depicts a climactic moment 
in Dimna's career. Having ingratiated himself with the lion-king, Dimna 
introduces him to an ox. But when the two become boon companions, the 
Iago of jackals seethes with jealousy, and with lies he so arouses the king 
against the ox that he kills him. On discovering his friend's innocence, the 





81. 

TWO MINIATURES FROM A 
MANUSCRIPT OF THE 
KALILA WA DIMNA OF BIDPAI 
Sultanate, Gujarat, mid-16th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 12 x 8 7 /h in. 
(30.5x22.5 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
The Nasli Heeramaneck Collection, Gift of 
Alice Heeramaneck (1981.373) 

a. THE leopard's COURT (folio 51 r) 

b. BURZUYA's INDIAN MISSION (folio 5v, 6r) 



81a 



137 




sad lion-king orders Dimna to stand trial for causing the lamented ox's death. 
Dimna is found guilty and sentenced to death by starvation. Here, within 
a zestful arabesquescape of flowers, fruit, and cypress trees, a resolute leop- 
ard sits in judgment on the devious jackal, from whom an outraged hare 
turns away in disgust. 

According to legend the tales of Karataka and Damanaka, as the jackals 
were originally called, were written by Vidyapati (Bidpai), a Brahmin sage 
who figures in the stories, which are in fact largely based on the even older 
fables of the Sanskrit Panchatantra {Five Books), in which human vices and 
foibles are instructively revealed through the personalities and activities of 
birds and beasts. In the sixth century, according to the Shah-nama, the sage 
Burzuya, at the order of the Sassanid ruler Nushirvan, located a copy of 
Bidpai's book in India and brought it back to Iran, where it was translated 
into Pahlavi. Ironically, the extant Sanskrit versions are translations from the 
Pahlavi text, which was also the basis for an eighth-century Arabic transla- 
tion by c Abd Allah ibn al-Muqaffa c , whose version spread Bidpai's tales to 
Turkey, Egypt, and other parts of the Islamic world. Nushirvan's copy of the 
Kalila wa Dimna would have contained marvelous pictures, which probably 
established the compositions for later illustrations. With each later version, 
however, the original designs changed, even when artists tried to be accu- 
rate by using tracings. 



138 



Most of the seventy-eight painted folios in the manuscript these two 
miniatures come from, which was painted in western India in the mid- 
sixteenth century, were derived from designs traceable to Egypt, to Mamluk 
prototypes that may in turn have been based on long-lost Indian originals. 1 
But the Heeramaneck manuscript contains many delightful, sometimes comi- 
cal, innovations. Of particular interest is the strong Ottoman flavor, espe- 
cially apparent here in the windblown tulips in Burzuya's Indian Mission, a 
double-page miniature in which the artist has caught the sage at a particu- 
larly puzzled moment in the course of his search for Bidpai's book. Other 
miniatures include characteristically Ottoman textile patterns and architec- 
tural elements, sometimes in conjunction with figures wearing unmistak- 
ably Safavid turbans. Dominating this stylistic melting pot, however, is an 
overwhelmingly Indian spirit. The smoldering palette is rich in burnt or- 
ange and colors otherwise known to us only in paintings from Sirohi, in the 
southwestern corner of the present-day state of Rajasthan, not far from the 
Gujarat border. 2 

The Heeramaneck Kalila wa Dimna, combining vitality, cosmopolitan 
style, courtly refinement, and popular elan, is as informative and histori- 
cally significant as it is appealing. Masterful pictures like The Leopard's Court, 
as rhythmically ornamental as embroidery, provide evidence of a major 
Gujarati stylistic synthesis. Burzuya's Indian Mission not only represents a 
fusion of Ottoman and indigenous styles but its potent juxtapositions of 
ornament, horses, and figures look ahead to the elements Gujarati artists 
brought to Akbar's imperial ateliers at Fatehpur-Sikri following the Mughal 
annexation of Gujarat in 1572. 

1. For characteristic Mamluk sources, see: Atil, Kalila wa Dimna. 

2. For a characteristic Sirohi picture, see: Lee, Rajput Painting, no. 53. A mid- 
seventeenth century miniature from a Bhagavata Purana series reveals many traces of 
the Gujarati elements apparent in the Heeramaneck manuscript. See: Welch and Beach, 
Gods, Thrones, and Peacocks, no. 15. 

Published: Notable Acquisitions 1981-1982, pp. 15-16; 'Art of Asia Acquired," 
p. 105, fig. 43. 



Architectonic as a building, this sumptuously restrained box was made to 
house the tools of the calligrapher's trade: reed pens, fine knives and a small 
block of hardwood for pointing and trimming them, and, perhaps, inks. Like 
other qalamdans made for discerning and affluent penmen, this one is in- 
scribed with its maker's name and the date of its execution as well as a 
virtual anthology of appropriate Arabic and Persian verses. The inscriptions, 
written in Nastaliq script, are executed in ivory and mother-of-pearl inlay 
that is as fine as illuminated calligraphy. 

The quatrain at the top of the front panel, which is only partly legible, 
opens with the poet's admonition to himself not to bring out his tongue 
(that is, not to speak) lest he divulge the taste of the beloved's sweet lip, and 
continues with verses implying that the waist of the beloved is so slender as 
to seem invisible, although it is improper even to mention so tender a secret. 
The name Humayun appears in the third line, and this poetical conceit may 
have been composed by the second Mughal emperor, Humayun. The lines 
below the quatrain announce, "The deviser of this . . . pen case is Shaikh 
Muhammad Munshi Ghaznavi/On the date of Sha c ban of the year 995 [July 
1587] it found completed form." 1 

In the corners to the right and left of the central inscription, the cou- 
plets read, "When I try the ink/I draw night over the face of day," and 
"When I tried the ink /I remembered your black tresses." The images are 
traditional: the calligrapher's ink-black script as it fills the white page is like 
night falling over- day; and like the black curls hiding the beloved's pale 
complexion. 

The inscription in the lower cartouche, placed obliquely to catch the 
eye, begins with the formula "God is too lofty and high for whatever they 
describe," and goes on to quote the opening lines of the Sufi mystic Jalal 



82. 

QALAMDAN 

Sultanate tradition, Gujarat, 

dated A. H. 995 (1587) 

Wood, inlaid with mother of pearl, 

14% x 25 5 /h in. (36 x 65 cm.) 

Benaki Museum, Athens (10181) 



ad-Din Rumi's Matlmavi-yi ma Q navi (The Spiritual Couplets): "Listen to the 
lamentation of the reed/How it tells of the ache of separation." Rumi was 
referring to the Sufi's reed flute; here his words also evoke the sound of the 
scribe's reed pen as it moves across the paper. 

Verses fill the cartouches in the upper border, although parts of them 
are now illegible. The inscription at the upper right on the front of the box 
alludes both to a Prophetic Tradition, "Man is between two of God's fingers," 
and to the pen, with which God writes whatever He wills: "... had made its 
place between His two fingers." In the verse in the next cartouche either the 
poet or the hollow reed of a pen or flute could be speaking: "You see, there is 
nothing in me of my own essence/He is in me, breath of my breath." And 
the metaphors continue with the boast of the pen: "I make the camphor- 
white page black as musk. ... I trace limpid water ornamental as the wild 
rose. . . . Sometimes I interpret the state of longing [and] track scars on the soul. " 

The artisans of Gujarat, where this pen box was made, were well known 
for their beautiful mother-of-pearl inlays, and inlaid tables, chests, and other 
objects made in the region were sold by merchants to clients all over India 
and beyond. The earliest known examples of Gujarati inlaying are two su- 
perb shields of the early sixteenth century, one now in the Bargello Museum, 
Florence, the other in the Topkapi Sarayi Museum, Istanbul, which also has 
in its collection a tabouret topped with an inlaid Indian game board and 
floral designs similar to those on this qalamdan. 2 Gujarati inlaid work was 
much admired by the Mughals, who brought specialized craftsmen to 
Fatehpur-Sikri, Agra, and Delhi to carry out major commissions. Shaikh 
Salim Chishti's tomb at Fatehpur-Sikri contains a magnificent inlaid wooden 
cenotaph by Gujarati artisans. 3 

1. Annemarie Schimmel has translated the inscriptions and made invaluable sugges- 
tions as to their interpretation. 

2. Ettinghausen, Treasures of Turkey, p. 235. 

3. For other examples, a pen box and a chest from the seventeenth century, see: The 
Indian Heritage, p. 162, nos. 549, 550. 



THE MUGHALS 



Zahir ad-Din Muhammad Babur (1483-1530) — the first Mughal emperor 
— was born with conquest in his veins. Descended from both Timur 
(Tamberlane) and Chinghiz Khan, he inherited the minor throne of Fergana 
(now in Soviet Turkistan) in 1494, when he was twelve. Already restive and 
ambitious, Babur (the Tiger) soon led his small army against Samarkand in 
an attempt to recover the capital of Timur from the Uzbeks, an attempt that 
was ultimately unsuccessful. His first major triumph was the capture ot 
Kabul and Ghazni in 1504, valuable base camps for further military forays. 
In 1519, prompted by India's richness and vulnerability and by his ancestor 
Timur's exploits in India, he led his small, eager army on an unsuccessful 
campaign via the time-honored route, the mountain passes of the northwestern 
frontier. A second attempt, in 1525, led to his great achievement, the founding 
of the Mughal empire. 

In 1526, at Fanipat, near Delhi, Babur's cavalry and artillery overwhelmed 
the combined forces of the Muslim sultan of Delhi and the Hindu raja of 
Gwalior; and a year later, at Kanhua, his hold over Hindustan was consolidated 
by his defeat of an alliance of Rajput princes. Although he died only a few 
years later, in 1530, Babur had established what was to become the largest, 
most powerful, and longest lasting Muslim kingdom in Indian history. 

In the absence of any works of art commissioned by him, Babur's 
greatest memorial, more permanent than his empire, is his autobiography, 
the Waqi c a(-i Baburi, written in Chaghatai Turkish and later translated into 
Persian as the Babur-nama (The History of Babur) by order of his grandson, 
Emperor Akbar, for whom it was illustrated by court painters. Although 
Babur also wrote and loved poetry, his sparkling, precisely observed and 
astonishingly candid prose is more compelling. The descriptions of people, 
flora and fauna, and events in his memoirs are written in sensitively naturalistic, 
reportorial style — the mode of expression that set the pattern for Mughal 
art and literature down through the years. 

A determined huntsman as well as warrior and author, Babur recorded 
the hunt depicted in the present miniature, which was painted by one of 
Akbar's most inventive artists, perhaps Miskin, for the earliest known copy 
of the translation prepared for Akbar in 1589, probably the earliest of Mughal 
historical manuscripts. We quote Babur's own description of the incident, 
which reveals how forcibly, sensitively, and credibly Mughal painters car- 
ried out the commissions of their exacting patrons: 'A hunting-circle was 
formed on the plain of Kattawaz where deer (kiyik) and wild-ass are always 



83. 

BABUR SLAYS A WILD ASS 

From a manuscript of the Babur-nama 

(The History of Babur) 

Mughal, ca. 1590 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: UVh X 9 in. (34.5 X 23 cm.) 

Miniature: 9% X 5 5 /s in. (24.6 x 14.4 cm. 

Private collection 



141 




plentiful and always fat. Masses went into the ring; masses were killed. Dur- 
ing the hunt I galloped after a wild-ass, on getting near shot one arrow, shot 
another, but did not bring it down, it only running more slowly for the two 
wounds. Spurring forwards and getting into position quite close to it, I 
chopped at the nape of its neck behind the ears, and cut through the wind- 
pipe; it stopped, turned over and died. My sword cut well! The wild-ass was 
surprisingly fat. Its rib may have been a little under one yard in length." 1 

1. Babur, The Babur-nama, vol. 1, p. 325. 
Published: Smart, "Six Folios," pp. 120-21, no. 95. 



U2 



The second Mughal emperor, Nasir ad-Din Muhammad Humayun 
(1508-1556), was left an empire scarcely worthy of the term; and he was 
hardly the man to strengthen it. Temperamentally an inheritor rather than a 
founder, Humayun delighted in art, literature, good company, and royal 
ways. In character he reminds us of his great-grandson, the quintessential 
aristocrat, Shah Jahan. He commissioned a tent complex within which his 
court could be arranged not only by rank but also according to astrological 
sign. Although the court astrologers prophetically drew up a highly favor- 
able chart for his first son, Prince Akbar, Humayun himself was not born 
under winning stars. His brothers Hindal and Mirza Kamran coveted his 
position, as did an aspiring Afghan nobleman, Sher Khan, once in the serv- 
ice of Babur, who seized Bengal, assumed the title Sher Shah, and led his 
army against the Mughals. In 1537, he forced Humayun back to the Mughal 
capital of Agra, and later drove him toward the Punjab. Dependably 
troublesome, brother Mirza Kamran then sealed off the Punjab and the road 
to Kabul, forcing Humayun into the deserts of Sind. 

In Sind, Humayun's prospects were bleak. Accompanied by his preg- 
nant wife, a few attendants, and an ever diminishing army, he improvised. 
In 1542, under these inauspicious circumstances, Prince Akbar was born. 
Perhaps the prince's good fortune was infectious. Life improved. Shah 
Tahmasp, the mighty Safavid ruler of Iran, offered refuge. This was an 
event of art-historical as well as political consequence, for the artistically 
discerning Mughal emperor went to the shah's court at just the time when 
Tahmasp's once intense and highly creative interest in painting was lagging. 
Humayun was thrilled by the brilliance of the shah's artists' work; and the 
painters responded to his connoisseurship. Although Mughal prospects were 
slim, several of the greatest Safavid artists tentatively accepted Humayun's 
invitation to join his entourage. 



84. 

PRINCES OF THE HOUSE OF TIMUR 
Probably by c Abd as-Samad 
Mughal, ca. 1545-50 

Opaque watercolor on cotton, 42 3 /4 X 4214 in. 
(108.5x108 cm.) 

Trustees of the British Museum, London, 
Presented by the National Art Collections Fund 
with a contribution by W. Graham Robertson, 
Esq. (1913.2-8.1) 




84 84, detail 



143 



Shah Tahmasp's generous treatment of Humayun was motivated at least 
m part by political expediency. Threatened by the Ottoman Turks on his 
western border and the Uzbeks to the east, he was eager to be on good 
terms with the ruler of Hindustan. In 1545, Shah Tahmasp helped Humayun 
capture Kandahar, the strategic fortress guarding the gateway to India, which 
Humayun had agreed to turn over to the Safavids. But Humayun disap- 
pointed the shah' He kept the fort and marched upon Kabul, which he took 
from his nettlesome brother Mirza Kamran. 

In 1546, Emperor Humayun sent for the Safavid artists whom he had 
met at the shah's court. They set off in 1548 from Tabriz for Kandahar, 
where they lingered until calm had been restored at Kabul. There they joined 
Humayun in 1549, and in 1554 they accompanied him on his successful re- 
turn to Hindustan. 

The Princes of the House of Timur dates from the earliest known phase of 
Mughal painting, soon after Emperor Humayuns formerly Safavid artists 
had reached the imperial court. Its size, innovative conception of portraiture, 
and close observation of incidental figures— the cooks, waiters, and minor 
courtiers— reveal Humayun's effectiveness as a Mughal patron reared in the 
tradition of Babur's all-seeing pattern. No purely Safavid miniature would 
have recorded the precise gestures and expressions of menials, or shown this 
festive scene so believably arranged. 

Although the Princes of the House of Timur has been somewhat cut down 
and repainted, it can be assigned to one of Humayuns emigre Safavid artists, 
c Abd as-Samad, working under the influence of his colleague Mir Sayyid 
c Ali. Typical of c Abd as-Samad are the bold arm gestures of the figures, the 
flight of birds at the top of the picture, the treatment of trees and vegetation, 
and, above all, the convincing arrangement of forms in space. 

Revered as an artistic and historical document, this picture may have 
been painted, as has been suggested by Michael Rogers, at Kabul, prior to 
Humayun's return to India. 1 Although the central figure has usually been 
identified as Humayun, Rogers intriguingly suggests that it may be a por- 
trait of Babur, characteristically shown in one of his garden palaces. Facing 
him, within the pavilion, are Emperor Akbar, his son Emperor Jahangir, 
and grandson Prince Khurram, who later reigned as Shah Jahan. These later 
portraits are imperial work of the Jahangir period, and can be dated to about 
1607, when Khurram, who is not fully grown, was fifteen years old, and his 
father, who must have commissioned them, was thirty-eight. Many other 
faces were retouched or overpamted at the same time. Rogers has pointed 
out that the foreground, now missing, would have shown musicians and 
entertainers, and would have added another twenty to twenty-five centimeters 
to the height of the picture. 

1. Letter, December 20, 1984. 

Published: Binyon, A Persian Painting of the 16th Century: Paintings from the Muslim 
Courts of India, pp. 22-23, no. 1; Rogers, Islamic Art, pp. 71-72, no. 60. 



85. 

HUMAYUN AND HIS BROTHERS IN A 
LANDSCAPE 

From the Berlin Album (folio 15r) 
Attributed to Dust-Muhammad 
Mughal, ca. 1550 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: W/h x 10 in. (41 x 25.5 cm.) 
Miniature: 15 3 /4 X 8 5 /h in. (40 x 22 cm.) 
Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, 
West Berlin 



In thk iorhgrouni) of a craggy, somewhat ominous landscape, Emperor 
Humayun sits on a rustic stone throne, receiving his brothers. The ladies of 
the household entertain one another in a picturesquely rustic zenana, or harem; 
musicians perform; and attendants await orders. Three small boys, one of 
whom must be Prince Akbar, romp beneath trees, near a life-sized elephant 
concealed in the rocky setting, prophetic of Indian days ahead. 

Such hidden grotesques were admired by Shah Tahmasp, the former 
patron of the painter of this miniature, who can be identified as Dust- 
Muhammad. A distinguished master artist, calligrapher, and man-ot-letters, 
Dust-Muhammad had studied at Herat with the great Timurid painter Bihzad 
before moving to Tabriz, the Safavid capital. A further adventure in his 
picaresque career brought him to the court of Humayun, for whom he painted 
this and other pictures, attributed to him on the basis of earlier, inscribed 
works. 



144 



This splendid, somewhat spooky picture is one of Master Dust- 
Muhammad's liveliest and best. Prior to being mounted in Emperor Jahangir's 
album, it probably was housed at Agra, where Humayun's palace included a 
three-building complex known as the Khana-i tilism, or Magic House. ' One 
of the buildings, intended for merriment, comfort, and pleasure, contained 
a special room on the uppermost level in which Humayun kept books, gilded 
pen cases, portfolios, albums with pictures (muraqqaha latif ma c i taswirha), 
and beautiful specimens of calligraphy. 

A nomad by temperament, Dust-Muhammad was fated not to remain 
long at the Mughal court, which was at Kabul when this picture was painted 
in about 1550. A decade or so later, at the age of seventy, he apparently 
returned to Iran, where he spent his remaining years piously copying out 
Qur 3 ans at Qazvin. 2 

1. For Humayun's Magic House, see: Ansari, "Palaces and Gardens of the Mughals." 

2. For further information about this artist, see: Dickson and Welch, The Houghton 
Shahnameh, vol. 1, pp. 118-28. 

Published: Kuhnel and Goetz, Indian Book Painting, p. 5, pis. 4 (det.),32. 



86. 

LOVING MUSICIANS 
Mughal, ca. 1550 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 7 5 /8 X 4 5 /h in. 
(19.5X11.8 cm.) 
Private collection 



Were it not for the characteristic turban unique to Emperor Humayun and 
his court, this miniature might be ascribed to the Uzbek tradition, centered 
at Bukhara. Instead, the pleasingly moon-faced musicians, with their deftly 
drawn bird-beak noses, fingers suitably shaped like plectra, and gracefully 
arcing brows, must be assigned to the little-known early phase of Mughal 
art. One senses non-Uzbek verve in the lyrically dancing trees keeping time 
with the music, in the zestful interaction of the lovers, and in the spritely 
duet of tambourine and lute. 

A copy of Jami's Yusuj and Zulaikha (New York Public Library), in- 
scribed with the name of Mirza Kamran, brother of Emperor Humayun, 
contains illustrations in the same style, perhaps by the same hand, though 
lacking Mughal turbans. Considering the origins of Emperor Babur, it is 
likely that his artists worked in a slightly earlier variant of this style. Another 
closely related picture, also with Bukhara turbans, is in the collection of the 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 1 

1. For the Boston miniature, see: Coomaraswamy, Catalogue of the Indian Collections: VI, 
pi. 24, no. 15.29. 

I am grateful to Michael D. Willis for calling my attention to Mirza Kamran's copy 
of Jami's Yusuj ' and Zulaikha. 



87. 

AKBAR HUNTING TIGERS NEAR 
NARWAR 

From a manuscript of the Akbar-nama 
(The History of Akbar) of Abu 5 l-Fazl 
Designed and partly painted by Basawan; 
colored by Tara Kalam 
Mughal, ca. 1590 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 14 3 / 4 x 10 in. (37.6 x 25.3 cm.) 
Miniature: 12 3 /s x IV2 in. (31.6 x 19 cm.) 
Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
(I.S. 2-1896 17/117) 



AblPl-Fath Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Akbar (1542-1605), known as Akbar 
the Great, inherited the Mughal throne from his father Humayun in 1556, at 
the age of fourteen. At the time, his empire was less consequential than 
either his lineage or his personality, and had he not been able to greatly 
expand his territories and establish an effective government, Mughal India 
would be known only to specialists. Akbar, however, was in every way 
remarkable. He was at once supremely practical and a visionary, a conqueror 
and a patron. In temperament, he was more of a founder than an inheritor; 
indeed, he can be said to have refounded the Mughal empire. Before his 
twentieth year he had pushed his borders far into Central India, and he was 
to continue an aggressively expansionist policy until he died, at the age of 
sixty-three, in 1605. Had he lived to the age of one hundred fifty, as his 
astrologers predicted, India's map, and perhaps that of the rest of the world, 
would have been even more extensively redrawn. By the time of his death, 
perhaps by poisoning, the Mughals controlled all of northern India and vast 
territories to the west, in what are now Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, and 
parts of the Soviet Union. 

Possessed of the force of nature, Akbar was a man of total conviction 
and self-confidence. The territories he conquered were effectively joined to 
the empire by the wisdom and power of his statesmanship. Despite differ- 



146 




ences of language and custom, the people of Akbar's realm were brought 
together by his policy of unification, one of his continuing preoccupations, 
which he furthered in every conceivable way. By marrying into the ruling 
families of captured territories, he linked himself to Kshatriya dynasties, thus 
availing himself not only of wives but of brothers-in-law, many of whom 
became officers in his ever growing, always busy armies. The policy of 
marrying Hindu wives not only joined the Mughal house to important 
indigenous ones but also hastened the Indianization of his initially foreign 
dynasty and culture. 

Akbar in his youth far preferred outdoor activities to bookish education. 
Riding, hunting, swordsmanship, shooting matchlocks, dancing, playing 
drums, and listening to music — all were preferred to what was usually consid- 
ered "educational." Fortunately, his regent, Bairam Khan, was helpful, 
sympathetic, and extremely capable; and young Akbar was able to satisfy 
his phenomenal curiosity about all aspects of the world in suitably imperial 
style. There was no need to learn to read: books on any subject he desired 
were read aloud to him by specialists, poetry was recited, and fantastic tales 
were spun for his pleasure. However great his physical energy may have 
been, his mind was in scale with it. 

Akbar's broad interests included the arts, which he encouraged with the 
same degree of intelligence and energy expended on his state. Like a magnet 
he drew to his court architects, craftsmen, and artists from most of India 
and beyond. Basawan, who designed and partly painted this brilliant recon- 
struction of one of Akbar's youthful exploits in the hunting field, was probably 
the most gifted of the imperial workshop's hundreds of artists. 

Abu 5 l-Fazl, who was so close a friend to Akbar that his biography, the 
Akbar-nama (The History of Akbar), is the equivalent of an autobiography, 



147 




87, detail 



describes the notable events of Akbar's life in the grandiloquent style of the 
time. Illustrated by the imperial artists, Akbar's own copy was the most 
immediate and impressive volume in a magnificent scries of historical 
manuscripts. We quote Abu>l-Fazl on the subject of the tiger hunt shown 
here, one of its vital pictures: 

"When [Akbar's] crescent standards cast their rays on the territory ap- 
pertaining to the fort of Narwar, a tiger such as might terrify the leopard of 
heaven came out of the forest with five cubs and onto the track by which 
the cavalcade was proceeding. His Majesty, the Shahinshah who had the 
strength of the lion of God in his arms and the coat of mail of the Divine 
protection on his breast, went alone out without hesitation in front of that 
lion-clawed, fiery-natured wild animal. When the spectators beheld this the 
hair on their bodies stood erect and sweat distilled from their pores. His 
Majesty with swift foot and alert arm attacked the brute and killed it by one 
stroke of his sword. 

"The wild beast so great and terrible, fell bleeding to the dust before the 
strength of his arm and the might of his courage, and a shout arose on all 
sides. This was the first beast of prey which His Majesty personally attacked. 
Its cubs were killed by the swords and arms of a number of brave men who 
were in attendance on the sublime stirrup." 1 

1. Abu'l-Fazl, Akbarnama, vol. 2, pp. 222-23. For an account of A kbar, see: Schimmcl 
and Welch, Ativan's Divan. Basawan is discussed in Welch, "The Paintings of Basawan. " 
Published: Welch, "The Paintings of Basawan," figs. 11, 13, 14 (dets.); Welch The 
Art of Mughal India, pp. 28, 163, no. 11 A; Paintings from the Muslim Courts p 39 no 
35; In the Image of Man, p. 153, no. 204. 



148 



Akbar's vitality and charisma reach out to us through time and space, 
whether transmitted by his extraordinary architecture, as at his wondrous 
City of Victory, Fatehpur-Sikri; through the hero-worshiping Abu'l-Fazl's 
florid but impressive prose; or by means of the many works of art that 
have survived from his prodigious reign. Akbar commissioned manuscripts, 
miniatures, and objets d'art just as he fought battles — unhesitatingly and 
with total clarity of command. A supreme patron, he in effect entered the 
minds and souls of great artists, through whom he painted pictures pre- 
cisely as he liked them. 

The emperor's fearlessness and electric energy are splendidly conveyed 
in Basawan's double-page composition showing a horrendous episode: Sight- 
ing an enraged elephant which had run amok and was about to cross a bridge 
of boats, Akbar leaped onto its back and gained control. The artist and his 
excellent assistant express the splash, the bobbing and hurtling, even the 
frenzied noise in one of the most vigorous of all Mughal compositions. 
Akbar's muscular strain gains emphasis by his proximity to the prominent 
figure of the boatman struggling with a pole to avoid capsizing. 

Basawan often returned to paintings he had outlined or designed, and 
enjoyed coloring parts that especially appealed to him, such as the dashingly 
brushed wood piling lashed with ropes in the left foreground near the 
distraught spectators. Like his imperial mentor, Basawan created as natu- 
rally as the wind blows. 

Published: Brown, Indian Painting, pi. xxxix; Welch, "The Paintings of Basawan," 
fig. 9; Paintings from the Muslim Courts, pp. 39, 42-43, no. 39; Welch, Imperial Mughal 
Painting, pp. 62-65, pis. 12, 13. 



AKBAR'S ADVENTURES ON HIS 
ELEPHANT HAWVI 
Double-page miniature from a manuscript 
of the Akbar-nama (The History of Akbar) 
of Abu'l-Fazl 

Designed and partly painted by Basawan; 
colored by Chatar Muni 
Mughal, ca. 1590 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 14 3 /4 x 9Vi in. (37.5 x 24 cm.) 
Miniature: 13% X 8V2 in. (34.5 X 21.5 cm.) 
Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
(I. S. 2-1896 21/117, 22/117) 





89 



Akbar often broke with the conventional patterns of his time. In a world 
of ardent hunters who protected the villagers from tigers while delighting 
in the sport, he was daringly expert. But one day near Bhera, in 1578, when 
Akbar was thirty-six, a great qamargah had been arranged, a traditional Mongol 
hunt prepared by an army of beaters who drove all sorts of game from miles 
around into an enclosure. Aided by huntsmen and trained cheetahs, the swift- 
est of animals, Akbar stormed through the enclosure, firing arrows and 
swinging his sword at deer, nilgai, and other captive animals. Violence trig- 
gered revulsion. In disgust, Akbar stopped the hunt. As Abu 3 l-Fazl described 
it, "A sublime joy took possession of his bodily frame. The attraction of 
cognition of God cast its ray." Afterward, heeding the emperor's wishes, 
"Active men made every endeavor that no one should touch the feather of a 
finch and that they should allow all the animals to depart according to their 
habits." 1 

Following Akbar's visionary experience, which took place at the time 
in life when others have been blessed with comparable revelations, he gave 
much gold to the holy men and poor of Bhera; and on returning to Fatchpur- 
Sikri, he filled a large tank in the palace with coins for charity. 

Miskin, to whom this picture can be attributed on the basis of style, 
was Akbar's most understanding animal painter. The dead or dying buck 
confronting Akbar could hardly be a more tragic object for contemplation. 
Although representations of the pensively Buddha-like emperor — lent a vi- 



150 



89. 

AKBAR ORDERING THE SLAUGHTER 
TO CEASE 

From a manuscript of the Akbar-nama 
(The History of Akbar) of Abu 3 l-Fazl 
Attributed to Miskin 
Mughal, ca. 1590 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 16Yh x \VA in. (41.5 x 29 cm.) 
Miniature: \2Yh X 7V 2 in. (31.5 X 19 cm.) 
The British Library, India Office Library and 
Records, London (Johnson Album 8, no. 4) 

NOT IN EXHIBITION 



brant aura by the wave-edged red coverlet on which he sits — and the con- 
cerned train of huntsmen winding from the distance are sensitively dramatic, 
Miskin's animals are painted with closer observation and deeper sympathy. 
One senses that on this occasion he shared the emperor's view; his animals 
happily enjoying their freedom constitute a deeply felt painted sermon. ~ 

1. Abifl-Fazl, Akbarnama, vol. 3, pp. 346-47. 

2. Another miniature designed and mostly painted by Miskin, from the Akbar-nama 
series in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, shows Akbar slaying animals 
in the enclosure; reproduced in Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pi. 14. 

Published: The Art of India and Pakistan, p. 151, no. 672, pi. 130; Paintings from the 
Muslim Courts, p. 52, no. 48; Falk and Archer, Indian Miniatures, p. 47, no. 3, pi. 1. 



No other Mughal battle scene so compellingly expresses the tumultuous 
energy and terrible chaos of armies and elephants clashing against one another. 
As members of Akbar's staff, the artists would have accompanied him on 
campaigns and sketched the horrors and exultations. Abu'l-Fazl, the emperor's 
boon companion, also served stints as reporter in the field and was expert in 
military matters. In the Akbar-nama, he describes the episode shown here, a 
culminating event in the rebellion of two Afghan brothers, c Ali-Quli Khan 
and Bahadur Khan, whose behavior so offended the emperor that he led his 
army in person from Agra to Jaunpur to punish them. When the rebels "saw 
the majesty of the army and the onset of the elephants they understood that 
it was the sublime cortege of the Shahinshah, and that His Majesty in person 
had set the foot of victory in the stirrup of conquest. c Ali-Quli Khan and 
Bahadur Khan set their hearts on death and stood in the plain of rebellion. "' 
Bahadur Shah's horse was struck by an arrow. It reared up, flinging the 
rebel leader to the ground, where he was surrounded and captured. " c Ali- 
Quli Khan ... in the pride of his disloyalty was inquiring after . . . Bahadur 
Khan, [when] a mast elephant [one in the rutting season] called Citranand, 
which was one of the royal elephants, rushed against the elephant Gaj 
Bhanwar . . . [which] fled, followed by Citranand. Gaj Bhanwar's driver drove 
his elephant among the ranks of the rebels, [who] opposed to Citranand the 
elephant Udiya. Citranand left Gaj Bhanwar and ran at Udiya and with one 
mountain-breaking blow stretched him on the dust of destruction. A great 
discomfiture ensued among the rebels, and many of their leaders became the 
harvest of the sword." 2 



90. 

THE MAST ELEPHANT CITRANAND 

From a manuscript of the Akbar-nama 

(The History of Akbar) of Abu 3 l-Fazl 

Designed by Kesu Kalan; colored by Chatar 

Muni; with special touches by Kesu Kalan 

Mughal, ca. 1590 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: WA x 9 5 /k in. (37.6 X 24.4 cm.) 

Miniature: l2Vi X 7>/2 in. (31.8 x 18.9 cm.) 

Victoria and Albert Museum, London 

(I.S. 2-1896 115/117) 



1. Abu 3 l-Fazl, Akbarnama, vol. 2, p. 431. 

2. Ibid., p. 432. 



Akbar delighted in fancifully imaginative tales. According to the Akbar- 
nama, in 1564 he relaxed after an elephant hunt at Narwar by listening to the 
Dastan-i Amir Hamza, or Hamza-nama (The Story of Hamza), a Persian epic 
that relates the exploits of Hamza, an uncle of the Prophet Muhammad, 
conflated with those of an adventurous namesake from Sistan. Although it 
is difficult to ascertain exactly when Akbar's grand series of illustrations on 
cloth to the Hamza-nama was begun and completed, its twelve volumes con- 
taining 1,400 illustrations were his most majestic and inspired project in the 
field of painting. Although less than ten percent of the original number 
has survived, and many of those have been damaged, repainted, or both, 
their surging vitality, dramatic impact, and detailed handling underscore 
Akbar's preeminence as a patron. Like his empire, they represent a new 
synthesis of elements from far and wide. Akbar's painting ateliers were 
directed by two of his father Humayun's Safavid artists, Mir Sayyid c Ali and 
c Abd as-Samad, who trained and supervised painters of talent recruited from 
within the land and from abroad. Whenever Akbar's forces added a city or 
province to the empire, its most gifted artisans were brought to court, where 
they participated in the ongoing creation of the Mughal cultural synthesis 
under the magnetically compelling influence of the emperor himself. 

Although the Hamza pictures were invariably designed and sketched by 



91. 

THE PROPHET ELIAS RESCUING NUR 
AD-DAHR FROM THE SEA 
From a manuscript of the Dastan-i Amir Hamza 
or Hamza-nama (The Story of Hamza) 
Composition attributed to Mir Sayyid c Ali 
Mughal, ca. 1570 

Opaque watercolor on cotton gauze 
Folio: 29 x 22 3 /4 in. (73.6 x 57.9 cm.) 
Miniature: 26% x 20 V2 m. (67.6 x 52 cm.) 
Trustees of the British Museum, London, 
Presented by the Reverend Straton Campbell 
(1925.5-29.01) 




91 



master artists and finished with the help of others in the royal workshop, it 
is sometimes possible to recognize the hands of specific masters. In this 
hauntingly poetic yet turbulent portrayal of the Prophet Elias saving a prince 
from the sea, into which he had been hurled by a demon, the prophet's 
proportions, gestures, and such details as his hands and the stumpy trees on 
the shore bring to mind the work of Mir Sayyid c Ali, who must have laid 
out the composition and painted parts of it. More agitated sections of the 
miniature — the leaping fish, swirling water, and twisting tree trunks — bring 
to mind the work of Akbar's Indian masters, such as Miskin, who may have 
painted them and the splendid birds and animals. Partially hidden in the 
animatedly ornamental, tapestry like jungle, they recall a series of marvelous 
panels carved in red sandstone in the so-called Turkish sultana's pavilion at 
Fatehpur-Sikri, which can be assigned to the same designer or designers, 
working at approximately the same time. Like this miniature — one of the 
half-dozen or so most compelling of the series — they perfectly balance Safavid 
nuance with indigenous flights of vision. 1 

1. For the panels at Fatehpur-Sikri, see: Smith, The Moghul Architecture of Fathpur-Sikri. 

Published: Arnold, Painting in Islam, frontispiece; Stchoukine, La Peinture indienne, 
pi. vi; Paintings from the Muslim Courts, p. 28, no. 11; Losty, The Art of the Book, pp. 
85-86, no. 54, ill. p. 76. 



The expansive style of Akbar's Hamza-nama series is also seen in these two 
miniatures from a manuscript of Duval Rani Khizr Khan, by the sultanate 
poet Amir Khusrau Dihlavi. The hero of the verse is depicted in Mughal 
setting, everyone but the angels dressed as though at Akbar's court. As in 
the Hamza-nama, characterizations are portraitlike and often verge on 
caricature. The potbellies, sneers, giggles, and raised eyebrows must have 
entertained the fortunate owners of this remarkable manuscript. 

According to seals in the book, it was in the library of two emperors, 
Shah Jahan and Aurangzeb. Earlier, it belonged to a prestigious lady of the 
imperial family, Salima Sultana Begum, a granddaughter of Emperor Babur 
and wife of Emperor Akbar. 

Amir Khusrau Dihlavi, perhaps India's most renowned Muslim poet, 



92. 

MANUSCRIPT: DUVAL RANI KHIZR 

KHAN OF AMIR KHUSRAU DIHLAVI 

(157 folios, 2 miniatures) 

Scribe: Sultan Bayazid ibn Nizam 

Mughal, dated a.h. 976 (1568) 

National Museum, New Delhi 

(L53.217) 

KHIZR KHAN AND DEVALDI ENTHRONED, 
HONORED BY ANGELIC VISITORS 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 12% x m in. (32.2 x 21 cm.) 
Miniature: \2 l A X 7 5 /s in. (31 X 19.3 cm.) 




92 



92, detail 



was the son of a Turkish officer and an Indian mother. He was born in 
Patiala in 1253, and he became court poet to virtually all the sultans of Delhi 
who reigned between 1270 and 1325. A disciple of Nizam ad-Din Auliya, 
who called him "God's Turk," he was praised for the sweetness of his lan- 
guage as Tuti-yi Hind, (India's Parrot). Prolific and experimental, he wrote a 
great number of lyrics, an imitation of Nizami's Khamsa (Quintet), a trea- 
tise on correspondence, and numerous historical works. He was the first to 
compose mathnavis not only on traditional themes but also on contempo- 
rary events. 

His third mathnavi of this sort was the love poem, or c ashiqa, Duval Rani 
Khizr Khan, finished in 1314. It recounts the tragic romance of Khizr Khan, 
a son of Sultan c Ala ad-Din Khalji and Devaldi, a Hindu princess. The poem 
is admired for its intense, tender romanticism and for its praise of things 
Indian. 

The miniature depicts the enthroned lovers honored by angelic visitors. 
Presumably, it was painted for Emperor Akbar. He later presented the volume 
to Salima Sultana, who must have enjoyed it with her friends and attendants 
in the harem. The picture invites speculation about Mughal women as patrons. 
Was Akbar 's poetically minded wife also a keen devotee of painting, and 
might not she have been directly involved in the illustration of this superb 
manuscript, the only one in a style markedly similar to the Hamza-nama to 
have survived? 

Published: Manuscripts from Indian Collections, pp. 96-97; Chandra, The Tuti-nama, p. 
72, pi. 36; Losty, The Art of the Book, pp. 86-87, no. 56; Nath and Khandalavala, 
"Illustrated Islamic Manuscripts," pp. 38-39. 



93. 

MANUSCRIPT: ANVAR-I SUHAILI 
(THE LIGHTS OF CANOPUS) OF HUSAIN 
WA C IZ-I KASHIFI 
(349 folios, 27 miniatures) 
No scribe's name given 
Mughal, dated a.h. 978 (1570-71) 
Manuscript: 14 X 9 in. (35.6 X 22.9 cm.) 
School of Oriental and African Studies, 
University of London (Ms. 10102) 

a. THE THIEF, THE DEMON, AND THE DEVOTEE 

(folio 174) 

Attributed to Basawan 
Opaque watcrcolor on paper 

b. MAIMUN, THE PATRIOTIC MONKEY, LURES 
THE BEARS TO THEIR FATE (folio 182) 
Opaque watercolor on paper 



Akbar's extensive, constantly growing library included many categories 
of literature and learning: biography, theology, comparative religion, science, 
mathematics, history, astrology, medicine, zoology, and anthropology. Many 
of the volumes were illustrated. And if certain projects required no more 
than matter-of-fact illustrations, others so excited the emperor that he en- 
couraged his artists to ever new heights. The Hamza-nama challenged the 
painters to release all their inventive powers; and the Akhar-nama, with its 
miraculously detailed descriptions of Akbar's reign, populated by a myriad 
of portraits, opened their eyes wide to life's fascinating hurly-burly. 

Active as a storm while engaged on military campaigns or attending to 
matters of state, Akbar in his hours of relaxation was also creatively busy. 
He is said to have needed very little sleep, and during restful moments he en- 
joyed commissioning and looking over volumes of literary classics, books 
of poetry, and of fables and other diverting tales. Intended for sustained and 
close scrutiny, they were of a size to hold rather than to view from a bookstand, 
and their miniatures differed from those for the larger scaled projects in being 
true "masterpieces," the work of a single master artist instead of a joint 



154 



effort designed or outlined by a master and then colored by one or more 
assistants. 

Akbar's Anvar-i Suhaili (The Lights of Canopus) of 1570-71 is the earli- 
est dated example of this sort, carried out when Humayun's formerly Safavid 
artists were strongly influential in the royal library. In every respect, it repre- 
sents a major effort to produce for Akbar an Indian manuscript of a subject 
of Indian origin equal to Shah Tahmasp's elegant volumes of Iranian poetry, 
to which Mir Sayyid c Ali and c Abd as-Samad had contributed during their 
years at the Safavid court. Paper, illuminations, pigments, and compositions, 
which often break into the margins — all are in keeping with Safavid practice. 
Although a few of the miniatures are by an artist trained at Bukhara who 
had not adjusted his style to the Akbari synthesis, the others are by artists of 
the most progressive wing of the royal workshop, closely directed by Mir 
Sayyid c Ali and possibly by c Abd as-Samad. 

This rustic scene from the manuscript can be assigned to one of Akbar's 
recruited artists, almost certainly Basawan, trying most assiduously to follow 
the strict directions of Mir Sayyid c Ali. It illustrates the story of a thief and a 
demon whose paths cross when each is bent upon swindling a devotee, the 
first by stealing his fat young she-buffalo, the second with fiendish temptations. 
The pair rejoice over their apparent partnership in crime but soon bicker, 
arousing their victim as well as his neighbors, who forces them to flee. 
Down to the last brushstroke, the Hindu painter strives for Safavid 
exquisiteness. Pigments of purity and brightness unusual for the Mughal 
workshops at this date are applied with enameled hardness, and the architec- 
ture is a virtual translation of Indian fences and thatched huts into the Safavid 
idiom. 

Nevertheless, Basawan's artistic personality shines through — his 
roundedly powerful intertwining trees, adapted from Mir Sayyid c Ali's; his 
animals brimming with individual character; and his animated portraits — all 
familiar from the Hamza-nama. Notwithstanding the strictures of his mentors, 
Basawan's dashingly liberated brushwork is also apparent. But he was 
struggling; and we suspect that Akbar sympathized with his plight. For the 
radically innovative patron's aesthetic is clear not only from his commis- 
sions but, indirectly, from his thoughts on literature, as quoted by Abu 3 l- 
Fazl: "Most old authors who string out their words . . . and display a worn-out 
embroidery, give all their attention to the ornamentation of words, and re- 
gard matter as subservient to them, and so exert themselves in a reverse 
direction. They consider cadence and decorative style as the constituents of 
eloquence, and think that prose should be tricked out like the works of 
poets." 1 Clearly, Akbar's preference for the unadorned coincided more closely 
with Basawan's aesthetic than with Mir Sayyid c Ali's elegant interpretation 
of the world in arabesque. Although one is grateful for the Iranizing fineness 
of this miniature and many others in the manuscript, and although Basawan 
must have learned a great deal from painting it, one is relieved — with Akbar 
and Basawan, we suspect — that the lessons in Safavid discipline soon ended 
(see also nos. 87, 88, 108, 110). 

Indian artists and sculptors invariably excelled in characterizing animals, 
as is apparent in the spritely Maimun, the Patriotic Monkey, Lures the Bears to 
Their Fate, one of the illustrations to a complex and enlightening fable in 
which monkeys avenge the slaughter of their companions by bears, who are 
enticed into a desert to expire in the heat. Although Mir Sayyid c Ali — who 
must have directed the painting bear by bear — was himself an exceptional 
animalier, most of the brushwork is probably by Miskin, an Indian-born 
"student." Like Basawan, he was one of Akbar's leading artists, who here 
adapted to Safavid ways. But beneath the fine, smoothly textured brushwork, 
almost Tabriz-style rocks, and strongly Safavid treatment of space, the 
churning water, overall burst of energy, and markedly Indian bears proclaim 
Mughal origin (see also nos. 89, 103, 109). 

1. Abu 3 l-Fazl, Akbarnama, vol. 2, p. 553. 

Published: The Art of India and Pakistan, p. 142, no. 636, pi. F; Wilkinson, Mughal 
Painting, pi. 3; Losty, The Art of the Book, p. 87, no. 57. 



94. 

TAMARUSA AND SHAPUR AT THE 

ISLAND OF NIGAR 

From a manuscript of the Darab-nama 

(The History of Darab) of Abu Tahir 

(folio 34r) 

By Basawan 

Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 14'/h X 9 in. (36 X 23 cm.) 
Miniature: 9 7 /x X 7Vi in. (25 X 19 cm.) 
The British Library, London (OR. 4615) 



Of all Akbar's manuscripts, the Darab-nama (The History of Darab) may 
be the most personal to him. In contrast to the sumptuous Anvar-i Suhaili 
(no. 93), with its minutely finished pictures painted under the rigid control 
of Akbar's Safavid emigres, the Darab-nama is ruggedly experimental and 
unselfconscious, less formally "imperial," and more expressive of Akbar's 
wishes. While turning its pages, one senses his mood during the later years 
at Fatehpur-Sikri and soon after his move to Lahore in 1585. Although the 
manuscript bears no dates, it was probably initiated in the later 1570s, when 
the emperor was in his late thirties. Still youthfully dynamic and experimental, 
he was eager for new adventures, and — following his vision of 1578 (see no. 
89) — brimming over with conviction. Life was at its fullest for Akbar and 
for the empire, which continued to expand. The government was running 
smoothly, and Akbar had entered the active quarter of life associated in 
India with the "householder." 

Akbar was amplified, not changed, by his vision. More appreciative 
than ever of otherworldly delights, he could now more effectively relate 
them to day-to-day life. Fantastic tales entertained him as before, and those 
illustrated in the Darab-nama indicate his increased ability, through his 
artists, to make the unbelievable credible. If the Hamza-nama series repre- 
sents Akbar's mood prior to his vision, and the 1570-71 Anvar-i Suhaili 
exemplifies the same mood under the very calming direction of Mir Sayyid 
c Ali and c Abd as-Samad, the Darab-nama reflects the newly integrated, vir- 
tually reborn, galvanic Akbar. The whirlwind style of the Hamza-nama 
has given way to more restrained rhythms and subtler colors, and charac- 
terizations have gained in depth and nuance. Dragons incredibly — if 
delightfully — outrageous in the Hamza-nama are believably menacing in the 



158 




Darab-nama; and nude figures, rare subjects in Mughal art, are rawly, embar- 
rassingly naked. 

Preeminent artists contributed to the Darab-nama: Basawan, Nanha, and 
Miskin. Basawan's persuasiveness as a dramatist, analyst of personality, and 
storyteller are always balanced by serious concern for pure painting. In 
Tamarusa and Shapur at the Island of Nigar, he has perfectly harmonized the 
fantasy of the island, its crystalline city built on pilings, with the fetching 
heroine, the voluminous and portentous Shapur gracefully entwined by a 
brushed gold shawl, and the innovatively foreshortened boy. Basawan in- 
stilled everything with life; the rooftops sprout, and the prow smiles 
responsively. 

Published: 

a. Paintings from the Muslim Courts, p. 29, no. 17; Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pp. 
50-51, pi 6; Losty, The Art of the Book, p. 88, no. 59. 




Akbar surrounded himself with magnificent works of art, great and small. 
A superb dagger or a carved sandstone panel for a pavilion was as artistically 
significant to him as a painting. To outfit all his forts and palaces and satisfy 
his aesthetic cravings, Akbar staffed his workshops with artist-craftsmen 
from all of Mughal India and beyond. The AHn-i Akbari (Statutes of Akbar), 
the last section of Abu^l-Fazl's Akbar-nama, describes several of the workshops, 
including the farrashkana, which was responsible for the manufacture and 
maintenance of tents and carpets, many of which were artistically extraor- 
dinary. Akbar did not confine men of talent within narrow specialties; 
artists, illuminators, and calligraphers provided motifs to stonecutters and 
weavers. 

Tangible evidence can be seen in the thirteen or so surviving fragments 
of a carpet (or pair of carpets) composed in a vast, surging arabesque as 
dynamic as the Hamza-nama — a phantasmagorical zoo of birds, serpents, 
oxen, elephants, rabbits, and other creatures, relieved by flowers and vases. 1 
Full of life, the motif of six bird heads flowering from the mouth of an 
animal can be interpreted on many levels. Most of the beasts are apparently 
disgorging or consuming one another as actively as its patron was swallowing 
up much of India. If it were music, one would hear martial drumming, the 
clash of cymbals, and trumpet salvos. The drawing of birds, beasts, and 
flowers projected from many angles, and the grandeur of the overall 



95. 

FRAGMENT OF AN ANIMAL CARPET 
Mughal, ca. 1585-90 

Cotton warp and weft, wool pile, 31 Vz in. X 
10 ft. tin. (80 cm. x 3.02 m.) 
The Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, 
Gift of Arthur Sachs (1952.35) 



159 



arabesque — a Safavid design gone wild — can be traced to Mir Sayyid c Ali, 
whose Tabriz miniatures reveal so many of its elements. 

It has been suggested that the fragmented animal carpet might have 
been made at Lahore, during the reign of Emperor Jahangir. 2 Although the 
fragments are technically and coloristically similar to later imperial Lahore 
carpets, their unleashed energy and lively fantasy far surpass the later ones, 
which seem calmer and almost mechanically refined in comparison. Very 
likely, these fragments, marred by the technical flaws of a new workshop, 
represent the farrashkana of Lahore soon after Akbar's move from Fatehpur- 
Sikri in 1585. The demonic mask invites comparison to the masks in the 
border of the famous, slightly later pictorial carpet in the collection of the 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, showing figures, architecture, and fantastic 
animals. 3 

1. Further fragments are in the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston; Textile Museum, 
Washington, D.C.; Burrell Collection, Glasgow; Detroit Institute of Arts; The 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; The Hermitage, Leningrad; Musee du 
Louvre, Paris; Collection C. L. David, Copenhagen; City Art Museum, Saint Louis; 
private collection, Cambridge, Mass.; and other private collections. See: The Indian 
Heritage, p. 74, no. 191. 

2. Walker, "Classical Indian Rugs," p. 255. 

3. For the Boston carpet, see: Welch, The Art of Mughal India, pp. 31, 165, pi. 22. 



96. 

BRONZE LION 

Mughal, ca. 1575 

Height 18V4in. (47.6 cm.) 

The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 

Harvard University Art Museums, 

Cambridge, Massachusetts 



This spirited, sleek, somewhat threatening bronze lion may have guarded 
Akbar's throne, or looked down imposingly from a column upon his assem- 
bled courtiers. For the image on the Mughal imperial standard, as recorded 
by a British visitor in the early seventeenth century, bears a close resem- 
blance in pose and character to the present bold animal. In style, it combines 





96 



naturalistically observed musculature, proportions, and ribs with passages 
of extreme abstraction. The lion's ears, shredded by triumphant encounters 
in the jungle, have been metamorphosed into pleasingly Muslim rosettes; the 
proud chest is shaped as a curving ridge; and dangerously bladelike underedges 
add force to the lion's forearms. As in other Mughal works of this period, 
there are traces of European influence, both in the overall concept and in the 
pose, which recalls lions rampant of heraldry. 1 

A sinuously agitated mane brings to mind the formulas for water seen 
in the giant illustrations to the Hamza-nama (see no. 91). One is reminded, 
too, of far earlier Indian prototypes— the stately and powerful Mauryan lion 
and bull capitals associated with another philosopher-king, Ashoka. Inasmuch 
as Akbar visited places where Mauryan pillars stood, it seems likely that he 
admired the sculptures and realized the applicability of Mauryan state 
symbolism to his own empire. 

A pair of gilded bronze lion masks, certainly from the same workshop 
as this lion, is in the collection of the Museum fur Ostasiatischc Kunst, 
Cologne. Presumably, they once adorned the tops of columns at Agra or 
Fatehpur-Sikri. 2 

1 . A pair of possibly related South German bronze lions cast from models by Hubert 
Gerhardt stand in front of the entrance to the Residenz of the former electors of 
Bavaria in Munich. A similar pair attributed to Hans Krumper was sold at Sotheby's; 
sec: Art at Auction: The Year at Sotheby's & Parke-Beruet, 1970- 71, pp. 288-89. 

2. For the Cologne masks, see: Bernhcimer, Romanische Tierplastik, pp. 126-27; Welch, 
"A Lion-King's Lion," forthcoming; Lowry and Brand, Akbar's India: An from the 
Mughal City of Victory, forthcoming. 



This massive, heavy object could crack an enemy's helmet, unhorse him 
at a single blow, or dent an elephant. With such possibilities in mind, the 
armorer cast its handsomely architectonic form in one piece and adorned the 
classic arabesque flanges with suggestions of elephant heads in profile. 
Brobdingnagian warriors wield maces of corresponding heft in several of 
the miniatures from the Hamza-nama, swinging them in fierce struggles against 
demons, giants, and polycephalous dragons. Others are illustrated in the 
Darab-nama. 

Comparably giantcsque weapons, once wielded by stout Turkish cham- 
pions, are exhibited as part of the Ottoman armory m the Topkapi Sarayi 
Museum in Istanbul. 



97. 

MACE 

Mughal, ca. 1575 

Cast iron, length 21 '/tin. (54 cm.), 
diameter at top 5'/x in. (13 cm.) 
The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



98 



98. 

DAGGER 
Mughal, ca. 1585 

Watered steel, gold, emeralds, and rubies, 
length \3Vi in. (34.3 cm.) 
Private collection 



Splendid weapons were appreciated by the Mughals for both utility and 
beauty. During the early Akbar period, swords and daggers were intended 
primarily as tools, secondarily to delight the eye. Along with robes of honor, 
jewels, and villages, they were frequent royal gifts. In the Hamza-nama min- 
iatures and other early paintings, one often sees daggers of exactly this form, 
lethally springy, with hilts ending in finials that snugly fit the hand. As with 
this one, their blades and hilts were forged for greater strength from single 
pieces of steel. 

Most early Mughal blades — as well as helmets, shields, and even scissors 
— were made by watering steel, a technique that was believed to strengthen 
them and to produce sharper edges and points, and which enhanced them with 
attractive ripple patterns. Two methods were used. In the first, pieces of 
hard and soft iron were combined by welding, folding them, and sometimes 
cutting the results into bars at rhythmic intervals. In the second, various 
types of iron (even meteoric ore) were combined in an ingot that was slowly 
heated and then hammered out to the shape desired. The heavy, curved blade 
of the present example was thickened near the point to pierce armor and 
chain mail. 

After the blade and hilt had been formed on an anvil, they were fitted 
into a stone slab indented to their shape, and held fast with gum, to be 
refined by grinding with abrasives and files. The hilt was then covered with 
gold and set with precious stones. By about 1600, this form of hilt sprouted 
a knuckle guard (see no. 127). Even peaceful Tansen, Akbar's greatest 
musician, faced life securely with a dagger like this one — perhaps an impe- 
rial gift — tucked into his belt (see no. 106). 



162 



The emperors, sultans, and rajas of India vied with one another to possess 
beautiful and important gems, which were set into thrones and weapons; 
valued as compactly portable state and personal wealth; given and received 
as the ultimate presents; and — as the final accents of royal splendor — worn. 
This jewel is not only intrinsically beautiful; artistry has made it into a deeply 
moving object, a brilliant garden or oasis — surely magical — for majestic 
contemplation. Emeralds were particularly admired by Muslims. In Sufism, 
an emerald mountain stands for the final level of spiritual aspiration, when 
man has passed through the blackness of annihilation and emerged in paradise, 
at last able to view the world as through the eye of God. More practically, 
according to popular belief, emeralds can blind snakes and dragons. 

This emerald is assuredly the most extraordinary gem of its kind in the 
world. Color and quality are unparalleled; and according to the noted 
gemologist Manuel Keene, there is no likelihood that an emerald of this size 
and quality will again be mined. The hexagonal form "is not purely the 
choice of the designer, but rather comes naturally from the fact that [it] is a 
sawn cross section from an emerald crystal, the crystallographic habit of 
which is to take the form of a hexagonal prism." 1 

This gloriously dark green gem was formed and found in Colombia, 
where Spaniards first obtained emeralds in 1514 and began mining them 
about forty years later. Presumably, it was carried by merchants to India 
during the second half of the sixteenth century. And soon after its arrival 
there, the extraordinary relief of tall, windswept palm trees was carried out 
by a masterful lapidary through drilling, rotary grinding, and the use of 
polishing points and wheels. 

The artist-craftsman elevated this emerald from the world of gems to 
the world of art, transforming it into an emblematic fusion of the organic 
and the crystalline, of the kinetic and the static. Asymmetric trees, growing 
ever upward and outward, suggest the transitory but vital force of life in 
contrast to the eternal but inactive hardness of the stone into which they are 
cut and in which the artist has made them immortal while he has at the same 
time imprisoned them. This huge emerald, in short, is a microcosmic allegory, 
something for princes to ponder, and from which to learn that without liv- 
ing light, not even a great jewel is radiant. 




99. 

EMERALD WITH DESIGN OF 

SPREADING TREES 

.Probably Mughal, ca. 1585 

233.45 carats, 2V* x 2 in. (5.7 x 5 cm.) 

The al-Sabah Collection, Dar al-Athar 

al-Islamiya, Kuwait National Museum 

(LNS.28.Hs) 



99 



Where was it cut, and when? In the absence of historical evidence and 
related material, one can only suggest, on grounds of style, that it is either 
Mughal or Deccani — probably the former — and that the movement of the 
trees and suggestions of landscape conform to what we know of Akbar's 
taste during his most vital period, about 1585. It was for him, we believe, 
that the inspired lapidary, perhaps in consultation with a court painter, in- 
fused this monumental stone with its joyous, talismanic power. 

1. Letter, January 1985. 

Published: Islamic Art in the Kuwait National Museum, p. 124. 



100. 

MADONNA AND CHILD 

Mughal, ca. 1580 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: W/a, x 8 3 A in. (37.5 x 22.2 cm.) 

Miniature: IV* X A X A in. (18.4 x 10.8 cm.) 

The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 

Harvard University Art Museums, 

Cambridge, Massachusetts 



At Fatehpur-Sikri, from 1575 through 1582, Akbar brought together 
representatives from every sect of Islam and from Hinduism, Buddhism, 
Zoroastrianism, and Christianity for all-night religious debates in a special 
hall, the c Ibadat Khana (House of Worship). He first met with Portuguese 
Christians in 1572 in Cambay. The following year he negotiated peace with 
Father Antonio Cabral at Surat, an encounter so promising that the Portuguese 
viceroy soon dispatched the priest to Fatehpur-Sikri for further talks in the 
hope of converting Akbar, and through him all of Hindustan. 

The Portuguese Jesuits were pleased when Akbar celebrated the Feast 
of the Assumption by setting up a picture of the Virgin given to him by 
Father Rudolf Aquaviva — whose mission was at court from 1580 to 1583 — 
and ordering his relations and courtiers to kiss it. On March 3, 1580, Father 
Rudolf gave Akbar a copy of Plantin's Royal Polyglot Bible, printed in the 
sixteenth century for Philip II of Spain, from which he subsequently di- 
rected his artists to copy pictures of Christ and of the Virgin Mary. A letter 
recorded at Goa in 1580 from Father Francis Henriques to Father Lawrence 
Peres says that on entering the church, Akbar was "surprised and astonished 
and made a deep obeisance to the picture of Our Lady that was there ... as 
well as to another beautifully executed representation of Our Lady brought 
by Father Martin de Silva from Rome, which pleased him no end. ... He 
was so taken up that he came in again with a few intimates and his chief 
painter and other painters, of which he has many excellent ones, and they 
were all thunderstruck and said that there could be no better painting nor 
better artists than those who had painted the said pictures." 1 The second 
picture is believed to have been a copy of the Byzantine Virgin said to be in 
the Borghese chapel of the basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome. It 
was made by order of Francis Borgia with the permission of Pope Pius V, 
and was sent to Goa in 1578. 

This Madonna and Child, with its markedly Byzantine character, is likely 
to have been painted immediately following the incident described in Father 
Henriques's letter. Stylistically, it can be dated to about 1580; it is the earliest 
Christian subject we have seen that can be assigned to a Mughal artist. The 
artist, probably a Vaishnavite Hindu, was so enthralled by the Christ Child 
that he interpreted him as a beguiling infant Krishna, merely substituting 
white skin for blue. 

Two further missions from Goa followed, a brief one in 1591, and another, 
led by Father Jerome Xavier, which arrived in 1595 and stayed until 1614, by 
which time Muslim orthodoxy had taken such a hold at the imperial court 
that conversion was unlikely. Nevertheless, Jesuits remained at the Mughal 
court until 1803. 



1. Correia-Afonso, Letters from the Mughal Court, p. 31. 
Published: Welch, Room for Wonder, pp. 18-19, fig. 1. 



101. Although one might suppose that Christianity was foreign to India, in fact 

CORPUS OF CHRIST it i s G f greater antiquity there than in any place other than Palestine. It is 

Probably Indian, Goa 16th century sometimes believed that Christ himself assigned the teaching of the Gospels 

Polychromed wood, height 381/2 in. (97.8 cm. • T j- . „u a t-i a t- i- ■ V , 

Museum of the Basilica Bom Jesus, Goa m t0 the A P ostle Thomas - According to tradition, Thomas reached 

India in 52 A.D., eventually settling in Malabar, where he had many con- 



164 





verts and founded churches before expanding his missionary activities as far 
as China. He is thought to have been martyred by Brahmins at Mylapore, 
near Madras, when he returned to India in 72 a.d. 

Strongly reminiscent of European Gothic sculpture, this Corpus of Christ 
was probably carved and polychromed at Goa by Indian craftsmen working 
under Catholic patronage, who infused it with their innate spirituality. 
Craftsmen of Goa specialized in wood carving to supply a clientele eager for 
sculptures and reliefs of the Virgin Mary, the Christ Child, the Crucifixion, 
the pantheon of saints, and many other subjects suited to altars and shrines 
for ecclesiastical as well as domestic use. Greatly varied in size and shape, 
their styles reflect those then evolving in Europe. 



165 



102 



102. 

CABASSET 
Goa, ca. 1560 

Gilded copper, I 1 A x IPA in. (20 x 30 cm.) 
Collection Rainer Daehnhardt, Belas, Portugal 



Because spices — particularly pepper — were so essential in Europe to pre- 
serve meat after it had been soaked in brine, venturesome Portuguese traders, 
who knew of Indian spices because of their contacts with the Arabs, worked 
their way to India. In 1486, Bartholomew Diaz rounded the Cape of Good 
Hope; and Vasco da Gama, seeking among the Syrian Christians of Travancore 
allies against the Arabs, reached Calicut in 1498. 

The resentment of European competition by Arab traders who had 
long prospered in their monopoly of the spice trade forced the Portuguese to 
send warships and establish fortified ports. The Portuguese in 1510 seized 
Goa, the principal station in a network that eventually included Malacca in 
the East Indies, Ormuz on the Persian Gulf, and outposts in East Africa on 
Socotra off the Red Sea, Diu in Gujarat, and Colombo in Ceylon. All this 
was masterminded by Affonso d' Albuquerque, who also wisely promoted 
close relations with local people. In India, Portuguese sailors, soldiers, and 
merchants were encouraged to intermarry, and Goa developed into a strongly 
Indianized Catholic community, which, as we have seen, was eager to 
proselytize, especially at seats of great power, such as the Mughal court. 

This gilded copper cabasset, alive with ornamental animals and scenery, 
is typically Portuguese in shape, though the repousse decoration bears the 
stamp of its Goanese origin. A hero's chariot harks back to village bullock 
carts, and the flowers, trees, and beasts, and a huntsman aiming his matchlock 
at a flying bird all glow with Indian character. This is believed to be the sole 
surviving example of five such "golden helmets" made in the viceregal armory 
of Goa for the Portuguese viceroys of India between about 1550 and 1580. It 
was probably commissioned in about 1560 for Don Diogo De Menezes, 
who later led the Portuguese armies during the reign of King Antony. 
Following the capture of the fortress of Cascais in 1580, Don Diogo was 
beheaded by the duke of Alba. The helmet is thought to have been taken by 
King Antony to the Azores, where it remained until recently. A similar 
helmet, presumably captured by the Dutch, was owned by Rembrandt, who 
painted it in his Man Wearing a Golden Helmet (Staatliche Museen, West Berlin). 

Published: Os Descobrimentos portugueses e a Europa do Renascimento, p. 81, no. 80. 
I am grateful to Rainer Daehnhardt for providing information for this entry. 



t66 



These snorting, stamping buffaloes — two varieties of the same species — were 
drawn and tinted by Miskin, Akbar's best animal painter, in recollection of 
an actual combat staged for the entertainment of the emperor and members 
of his immediate circle. Animal combats, whether between elephants, 
buffaloes, tigers, or smaller beasts, were frequent events at court, viewed by 
the emperor and his guests from a terrace or rampart. Sketching from life, 
the artist must have sat near the noble onlookers, who took bets on the 
outcome — as did the animals' grooms — and encouraged their favorites with 
ardent loyalty. 

Miskin's draftsmanly style is unmistakable, and his gift for conveying 
both the inner spirit and outer form of animals probably inspired Akbar to 
summon him for the present assignment. Not even the great Basawan, 
represented here by his stunning elephant chase (no. 88), surpassed Miskin 
in capturing such dramatic details as the buffaloes' expressions of victorious 
exultation and gored despair. The loser in such a combat might be turned 
into a mashk — a leather waterbag, such as the one shown here being used to 
keep down the dust. 

By delicate modulations of tone, achieved with invisibly small 
brushstrokes, Miskin modeled the animals' masks and bodies into tautly 
rounded forms reminiscent of Achaemenid animal reliefs, curvaceously 
ornamental yet starkly powerful. But unlike the Achaemenids, the Mughal 
stopped action at the most telling instant, and achieved a degree of empathy 
that enables us to hear the animals' bellowing. 

Published: Sotheby's, London, November 24, 1952, lot 107; Parke-Bcrnet, New 
York, December 15, 1962, lot 285; Sotheby's, London, June 20, 1983, lot 143; "Recent 
Sales," p. 308, no. 29; Notable Acquisitions 1983-1984, pp. 6-7; Hceramaneck, Master- 
pieces of Indian Painting, p. 158, pi. 167. 



103. 

BUFFALOES IN COMBAT 

Attributed to Miskin 

Mughal, late 16th century 

Brush and ink with color on paper, 

6 7 /8X9'/ 2 in. (17.5x24.1 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 

Harris Brisbane Dick Fund (1983.258) 




167 



Comfortably at ease, reclining in a bamboo grove, a sleekly groomed and 
well-fed lion awaits his next adventure — be it another meal or an amorous 
lioness. Like the birds, bamboo, and grass, he has been interpreted midway 
between the naturalistic and the ornamental modes: his alert eye, wrinkled 
cheeks, fur, and decorously crossed paws are sharply observed; but the styl- 
ized animal design (janvar-sazi) of Iranian tradition is apparent in the elegant 
twist of spine and calligraphic sinuosity of tail and lips. 

Attributing this beguiling beast — far too docile to terrorize a village — is 
difficult; but Iranian graces in conjunction with acute study from life bring 
to mind early work by Mansur, the Mughal natural history painter usually 
associated with the reign of Emperor Jahangir (see nos. 141-45). 



104. 

A LION AT REST 

Mughal, ca. 1585 

Opaque watcrcolor on paper 

Folio: 15 x 10'/4 in. (38.1 x 26 cm.) 

Miniature: 8x6 in. (20.3 X 15.2 cm.) 

Collection Nasli and Alice Heeramaneck , 

New Haven 



Published: Heeramaneck, Masterpieces of Indian Painting, p. 161, pi. 195. 



The Mughal emperors assembled albums as well as manuscripts. These 
varied in size and character, but most of them combined calligraphy, miniatures 
— some of which had been removed from manuscripts — drawings, prints, 
and at times European watercolors. Most of the miniatures were Mughal, 
with occasional Iranian ones to add variety. The Mughal material ranged in 
subject from portraiture to studies of flora and fauna to picturesque fancies. 

Special book craftsmen were responsible for composing, trimming, and 
gluing the bits and pieces, which had been selected for inclusion by the 
emperors themselves; and illuminators — some of whom also painted mini- 
atures — were responsible for the borders, surrounds, and other ornamental 
passages. Completed folios were brought to the emperor for his approval, 
and he frequently took reed pen in hand to note identifications or add per- 
sonal comments. Although the album from which this folio comes is known 
both as the Berlin Album, due to its location, and as the Jahangir Album, it 
contains many pre-Jahangiri Mughal pictures, and it was probably initiated 
for Akbar toward the end of the sixteenth century. The borders, mostly 
commissioned by Jahangir, are marvelously varied, often combining ara- 
besque ornament with landscape, figures, animals, or — as here — twittering 
birds. 

The majority of the portraits in Mughal royal albums are formal depic- 
tions of the emperor and his circle (comparable to those we keep in family 
photograph albums), of rival dignitaries, or of notable calligraphcrs, artists, 
musicians, poets, and craftsmen. The present folio includes two portraits of 
elderly courtiers, a pleasing band of landscape, perhaps snipped from a 
miniature, and the earliest portraits known to us of Mughal artists at work 
— all assembled in a nearly convincing ensemble, with trees and flowering 
plants improvised here and there to cover the joins. 

One of the painters wears spectacles while drawing a Madonna and 
Child, and we assume that magnifying glasses were also used. Both artists 
sit typically cross-legged, surrounded by the tools of their trade, with the 
work in progress fastened to a comfortably propped-up drawing board. 
Pigments, composed of finely ground minerals, gold, silver, earths, and 
certain organic substances (crushed insects, animal urine, and so forth), were 
kept for ready access in clamshells, in close proximity to a cup of water and 
ajar of the glue employed as binding medium. Brushes were made by the 
artists themselves from squirrel or kitten hairs, carefully graded and fastened 
into bird quills. 

Moderately complex miniatures required a month to complete. After 
burnishing the paper with a smooth rounded stone against a large rectangu- 
lar one of comparable texture, the artist made an underdrawing in faint gray 
or brownish red brushstrokes. Often, he worked from earlier sketches made 
from life; but occasionally he employed charbas, or tracings on gazelle skin, 
which were pricked along the outlines so that black pigment could be pushed 
through to transfer the design. Occasionally, too, Indian painters worked 
directly from life. 

Errors were easily corrected by covering them over with opaque white 



105. 

ARTISTS AT WORK 

From the Berlin Album (folio 21 r) 

Mughal, ca. 1585 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 23% x W/2 in. (60 x 42 cm.) 

Miniature: \6Vx X 10 in. (41 X 25.5 cm.) 

Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kukurbesitz, 

West Berlin 




105 



pigment and redrawing — a practice that lent spontaneity to the finished 
work. Once the underdrawing had been laid in, the paper was given a thin 
wash of opaque white. This was set by burnishing, a process done to main- 
tain a smooth finish and to bind one layer of color to the next. The depth of 
color so enjoyable in Indian miniatures was achieved by building up enamellike 
intensity with repeated layers of pigment. 

Gold and silver pigments were made by pounding bits of the metal be- 
tween sheets of parchment into thin leaves; these were ground with salt into 
fine powder with a mortar and pestle. The salt was then washed out and the 
resultant pigment mixed with glue in aqueous solution. Gold was often used 
in two or more tones, a lighter tone made by adding silver, and a richer, 
yellower one by adding copper. To avoid the tarnishing of silver pigment, 
artists of the eighteenth century and later sometimes substituted zinc for 
silver. 

Metallic pigments usually were applied late in the development of a 
miniature. When brushed on in solution, gold and silver seem dull; but once 
lightly rubbed by the smooth agate or crystal burnisher, they take on magi- 
cal brilliance. A steel needle with a rounded point was used to make stria- 
tions in the metal or to create glittering points of light. Pearls and other 
raised passages were made by brushing on small globs of thick white pigment. 
Occasionally, actual jewels — rubies, emeralds, diamonds — or jewellike beetle- 
wing cases were attached to miniatures for special opulence (see no. 265). 

Published: Kiihnel and Goetz, Indian Book Painting, pp. 9, 12, pi. 39 (dets.). 



During the seventh year of Akbar's reign, a notable event at court was the 
arrival of Tansen, the illustrious musician and leading exponent of the dhrupad 
style associated with Gwalior. Abu 3 l-Fazl described the circumstances as 
follows: "Inasmuch as the holy personality of His Majesty the Shahinshah is 
a congeries of degrees, spiritual and temporal, and a collection of divine and 
terrestrial excellences so that when matters are discussed the master of each 
science imagines that the holy personality has devoted his whole attention to 
his particular subject, and that all his intellect has been expended on it, the 
knowledge which His Majesty has of the niceties of music, as of other 
sciences, whether of the melodies of Persia, or the various songs of India, 
both as regards theory and execution, is unique for all time. As the fame of 
Tansen, who was the foremost of the age among the kalawants [noble 
musicians] of Gwaliar came to the royal hearing, and it was reported that he 
meditated going into retirement and that he was spending his days in attendance 
on Ram Cand the Rajah of Pannah, His Majesty ordered that he should be 
enrolled among the court musicians. Jalal Khan Qurci, who was a favourite 
servant, was sent with a gracious order to the Rajah for the purpose of 
bringing Tansen. The Rajah received the royal message and recognized the 
sending of the envoy as an honour, and sent back with him suitable presents 
of elephants of fame and valuable jewels, and he also gave Tansen suitable 
instruments and made him the cheek mole of his gifts. 

"Tansen [later] did homage and received exaltation. His Majesty the 
Shahinshah was pleased and poured gifts of money into the lap of his hopes. 
His cap of honour was exalted above all others. As he had an upright nature 
and an acceptable disposition he was cherished by long service and associa- 
tion with His Majesty, and great developments were made by him in music 
and in composition." 1 

Tansen died on April 26, 1589, and "by His Majesty's orders, all the 
musicians and singers accompanied his body to the grave, making melodies 
as at a marriage. The Joy of the Age was overcast, and His Majesty said that 
his death was the annihilation of melody. It seems that in a thousand years, 
few have equalled him in sweetness and art." 2 

A Mughal living legend, Tansen was also greatly revered by Akbar's 
son, Jahangir, who described in his Memoirs a remarkable episode. Shaikh 
Salim Chishti, the saint who was considered by Akbar to have made possi- 
ble the birth of the prince by interceding with God, once requested that 



106. 

TANSEN OF GWALIOR 
Mughal, ca. 1585-90 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 6% x 4-Vk in. (17.5 x 11.1 cm. 
Miniature: 4 5 /h x 2 5 A in. (1 1.8 x 6.7 
National Museum, New Delhi 
(50.14/28) 




106 



Tansen come to sing for him. He also invited Akbar to attend; and when 
both had arrived, the shaikh said, '"The promised time of union has come, 
and I must leave you. We have made Sultan Salim [the prince] our successor, 
and have made him over to God, the protector and preserver. ' Gradually, his 
weakness increased, and the signs of passing away became more evident, till 
he attained union with the 'True Beloved.'" 3 

In keeping with Akbar's desire for truthful, penetrating likenesses — as 
compared to the Iranian tradition, which tended to idealize — this characteris- 
tic early Mughal portrait vividly conveys the great musician's appearance, 
gestures, and spirit. According to Abu'1-Fazl, "[Akbar] himself sat for his 
likeness, and also ordered to have the likenesses taken of all the grandees of 



772 



the realm. An immense album was thus formed: those that have passed away 
have received a new life, and those who are still alive have immortality prom- 
ised them." 4 Like Tansen's portrait, probably once contained in the album, 
the figures are isolated against simple green grounds, to be studied like 
butterflies mounted in rows on pins. 

1. Abu'l-Fazl, Akbarnama, vol. 2, pp. 279-80. 

2. Ibid., vol. 3, p. 816. 

3. Jahangir, The Tuzuk, vol. 2, p. 71. 

4. Abu'1-Fazl, AHn-i Akbari, pp. 108-9. 

Published: Delhi Museum of Archaeology, Loan Exhibition, pp. 120-21, no. C.502, 
pi. Lii(f); Brijbhushan, The World of Indian Miniatures, pi. 45. 



Akbar's portrait artists were instructed to record their sitters' innermost 
natures, a task they sometimes carried out with embarrassing scrupulousness. 
Inasmuch as Raja Man Singh was one of Akbar's Nauratan, or Nine Jewels, 
his boon companions, one would not expect Akbar's artists to treat him less 
than admiringly, even though he and the emperor occasionally differed in 
opinion. He joined Akbar's court in 1562, when Akbar married the eldest 
daughter of Raja Bihar Mai of Amber, who had adopted Man Singh. Raja 
Man Singh received command of seven thousand horse, a very prestigious rank 
in the imperial hierarchy. Nevertheless, the senior Rajput nobleman, Rana 
Pratap Singh of Mewar, refused to eat with him — or even to receive him — on 
the grounds that he was a turncoat to the Rajput cause, in league with the 
despised Mughals. 

Akbar ordered Man Singh to lead a Mughal army against the unyielding 
Rana Pratap; and at the Battle of Haldigat, twenty-two thousand Mewar 
warriors were slain. The rana escaped — much to the dismay of Akbar, who 
believed that Man Singh's loyalties to the Rajput cause interfered with duty. 
Raja Man Singh also distressed the emperor by refusing to join the Divine 
Faith, a religion devised by Akbar to strengthen the empire by unifying 
Muslims, Hindus, and other religious groups. Although a slight coolness 
developed between Akbar and Raja Man Singh, he was appointed governor 
of Bengal, a major post he held during the rest of the reign. Under Emperor 
Jahangir, he served in the Deccan, where he died during the ninth regnal year. 
Sixty wives mounted his funeral pyre in rites of sati. 

This small portrait was part of an album prepared for Prince Khurram 
(later Shah Jahan), and it contained a number of calligraphies written in the 
prince's own hand, some of them dated 1611-12. Presumably, most of its 
miniatures, a few of which are as early as about 1575, were gifts from his 
grandfather, Akbar, who knew of the young prince and Man Singh's friend- 
ship. 1 The other side of the folio contains verses probably copied by the 
prince himself in characteristically Mughal Nasta c liq script tending toward 
Shikasta. Before Akbar's death, Man Singh tried to persuade him to appoint 
Prince Khurram his successor, bypassing the young man's father, Prince 
Salim, who inherited the throne as Emperor Jahangir. A final link between the 
old raja and Prince Khurram was forged after Khurram had come to the throne. 
On the death of his favorite wife, Mumtaz-Mahal, land that had belonged to 
Raja Man Singh was acquired as the site for her tomb — the Taj Mahal. 

1. For Prince Khurram's album, see: Welch, Indian Drawings, pp. 34-35, no. 7; Beach, 
The Grand Mogul, p. 74. 

Published: Notable Acquisitions 1982-1983, pp. 10-11. 



107. 

RAJA MAN SINGH OF AMBER 

Mughal, ca. 1590 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 9V4 x 5% in. (23.5 X 14.3 cm.) 

Miniature: 4 7 /h X 3 Vh in. (12.5 x 7.8 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 

Purchase, Gift of Jacques L. Galef and 

Bequest of Charles R. Gcrth, by exchange 

(1982.174) 



Mughal art is famed for its animal studies, the earliest of which, exem- 
plified by this ram, are datable to the reign of Akbar. Babur's memoirs, 
with their observant descriptions of flora and fauna, suggest that Babur 
would have commissioned such pictures; and one knows from the memoirs 
of Humayun's servant Jauhar that once, when a bird had been caught, 
"[Humayun] took a pair of scissors and cut some feathers off the animal; . . . 
[he] sent for a painter, and had a picture taken of the bird, and afterwards 
had it released." 1 



108. 

AN IMPERIAL RAM 

Attributed to Basawan 

Mughal, Agra, ca. 1585 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: SVh x 10% in. (20.6 x 26.4 cm.) 

Miniature: 5V* x 7 X A in. (13 x 18.4 cm.) 

Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 

(AG. 1413) 




107 




108 



This tethered ram, perhaps a champion admired for its strength in 
combat, can be attributed to Akbar's most gifted painter, Basawan, whose 
ability to paint rounded, believably tactile forms and to instill life into his 
subjects is nowhere more apparent than here. A later, fragmentary variant of 
this picture is in the collection of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. 2 

1. Jauhar, The Tezkereh, p. 43. 

2. For the Boston Ram, see: Coomaraswamy, Catalogue of the Indian Collections: VI, 
p. 51, no. 17.3104, pi. xlii. 

Published: Das, Treasures of Indian Painting, ser. 4, pi. n. 

Akbar's appreciation of all the world's wonders, as well as his desire to 
promote unifying understanding between Muslims and Hindus, led him to 
commission illustrated translations of Hindu epics, such as the Ramayana 
and the Mahabharata, which fired the imaginations of his artists as much as 
had the fantastic tales from the Hamza-nama. The many illustrations to these 
thrilling manuscripts dating from the late 1580s, now in the Maharaja Sawai 
Man Singh II Museum of Jaipur, and to the slightly later, now dispersed, 
Harivamsa, an appendix to the Mahabharata, radiate religious intensity. 

Krishna Lifts Mount Govardhan is one of the illustrations to the Harivamsa 
(The Genealogy of Hari). According to legend, the young god Krishna 
asserted his power over the god Indra by convincing the gopis (herdswomen) 
near Mount Govardhan to worship the spirit of the mountain in his place, 
after which Krishna transformed himself into the Mountain Spirit — and took 
delight in their offerings. Enraged by the upstart god, Indra scoffed at him 
before the gopis and raised up a terrible storm, threatening the land and 
people. The gopis and their families pleaded for Krishna's help, which he 
gave unstintingly. As though it were a large umbrella, he lifted Mount 



109. 

KRISHNA LIFTS MOUNT GOVARDHAN 
From a manuscript of the Harivamsa 
(The Genealogy of Hari) 
Probably by Miskin 
Mughal, ca. 1590 

Opaque watercolor on paper, IWh X 7 7 /h in. 
(28.9x20 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
Purchase, Edward C. Moore, Jr. Gift 
(28.63.1) 



175 



Govardhan and, balancing it on his little finger, protected them from the 
storm. 

This painting is probably by Miskin, who gave to it its miraculous credi- 
bility by couching it in characteristically Mughal everyday terms. The villagers, 
animals, and trees might all be encountered while wandering in rural India 
today. 

Published: Breck, "An Early Mughal Painting," pp. 133-34; The Art of India and 
Pakistan, p. 151, no. 673; Metropolitan Museum of Art, Art Treasures, p. 240, no. 
208, pi. 208; Welch, The Art of Mughal India, pp. 28, 164, no. 13, pi. 13; Welch, 
Imperial Mughal Painting, p. 60, pi. 10; "Islamic Painting," p. 39; Schimmel and Welch, 
Ativan's Divan, pp. 27-28, fig. 2; Chaitanya, A History of Indian Painting, pi. v. 



A more accurate view of Mughal court life could not be found than this 
dramatically stirring scene, in which an argumentative man stands in the 
gaping jaws of a black arabesque carpet. In it every figure attests to the 
brilliant artist Basawan's perceptive eye for humanity. The expressions of 
the musicians are archetypal, and the animated studies of courtly gestures 
could illustrate a book on Indian body language. Down to the last wine cup, 
moreover, it is an unrivaled source of information on the paraphernalia of 
Akbar's court. 

By the last decade of the sixteenth century imperial artists, illuminators, 
binders, and other craftsmen had achieved unprecedented degrees of refine- 
ment. Although manuscripts of jewellike elegance are known from Iran as 
early as the Timurid period, only now did Akbar's studios have full access to 
the finest of pigments, papers, and other materials required to produce volumes 
of comparable splendor. 

Such perfectionism can be traced to 1588, when a superb little manuscript 
of Ativan's Divan was produced in the ateliers of Lahore. Although the 
manuscript was illustrated by Akbar's most admired artists, the subtleties of 
its miniatures imply the guidance of another patron, doubtless the discern- 
ing Prince Salim, who was nineteen years old at the time and still on close 
terms with his father, with whom relations deteriorated after 1591, when 
Akbar accused Salim of trying to poison him. In the 1580s and 1590s, Salim 
would have been welcome in the royal ateliers, where he surely discussed art 
at great length with such revered masters as Miskin and Basawan, and with 
his contemporary, Basawan's son Manohar, who became one of his ablest 
artists. 

When Akbar's magnificent Anvar-i Suhaili was illustrated in 1596-97, 
Prince Salim was in better odor with his father, largely due to the yet more 
upsetting behavior of his younger brothers, Murad and Daniyal. His influence 
in the painting studios therefore remained strong, and even revered Basawan, 
the painter of A Crisis at Court, must have gained from his discerning 
encouragement. 

The fullest account of Basawan was written by Abu 3 l-Fazl in the A'xn-i 
Akbari: "In designing and portrait painting and coulouring and painting 
illusionistically and other aspects of this art [Basawan] became unrivalled in 
the world and many connoisseurs prefer him to Daswanth." Inasmuch as 
Daswanth was considered by the same critic to have "surpassed all painters 
and become the first master of the age," this was high praise. 1 

Basawan's career sheds light on the role of the artist in Akbar's India. 
According to Pramod Chandra, his name links him to the Ahir caste of 
Uttar Pradesh, whose members are noted as herdsmen and agriculturists. 2 
His artistic talent earned him recognition, and he was recruited for the impe- 
rial Mughal ateliers as early as 1565 to 1570, when he worked on the Tuti- 
nama (Tales of a Parrot), now in the Cleveland Museum of Art. Although 
there are traces of his pre-Mughal style in his miniatures for the Cleveland 
manuscript, he had already formed a strongly individualized idiom fully in 
keeping with the Mughal synthesis, to which he had contributed important 
elements. His psychologically acute — even Rembrandtesque — characteriza- 
tions, painterliness, three-dimensional treatment of space, and swelling 
roundness of form are all apparent in A Crisis at Court, which exemplifies 



110. 

A CRISIS AT COURT 

From a manuscript of the Anvar-i Suhaili 

(The Lights of Canopus) 

By Basawan 

Mughal, Lahore, dated a.h. 1005 or 1006 
(1596-97) 

Opaque watcrcolor on paper, 9 7 /x X 5% in. 
(25x14.2 cm.) 

Bharat Kala Bhavan, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi (9069/3) 




110 



the peak of his career. Basawan continued to develop artistically into the 
early seventeenth century, when he either retired from painting or died at 
approximately the age of seventy. 3 

1. Abu'l-Fazl, A 3 m-i Akbari, p. 114. Translation by Robert Skelton. 

2. Personal communication. 

3. For a study of this artist, sec: Welch, "The Paintings of Basawan." 
Published: Welch, "The Paintings of Basawan," p. 11, pi. A. 



As Akbar aged, his taste became increasingly refined. In his more worldly 
and military younger days, lacquer bindings such as this one, with its shiny, 
densely adorned surfaces, might have caught his fancy momentarily, but 
he would hardly have urged his craftsmen to create them, any more than 
he would have urged his painters to work in the evolved and subtle manner 
of the twenty-one miniatures it contains. By the end of the century, however, 
when he approached sixty, his tastes had changed, and, influenced by his son 
Salim, he enjoyed seeing and handling highly refined works of art. 

Miniature-like, this binding presents two worlds. One face shows a prince 
interrupting a successful hunt to visit a holy man; the other describes aerial 
and aquatic struggles between divs and angels in a paradisiacal landscape. 
Both are by a court painter who had turned his hand to the lacquerer's art, 
working in gold and colors over a deep red ground. He followed Safavid 
prototypes in creating this miniaturistic binding, which is one of the finest 
and best preserved to have survived from Akbar's court. 1 

During the late sixteenth century, there was a vogue at the imperial 
court lor pictorial ornament, as can be seen in this binding and in carpet 
design (see no. 112). Lacquer painting had been used for bindings and playing 
cards by Safavid artists, who brought the technique to India. 

1. For the finest Safavid lacquer prototype, see: Pope, A Survey of Persian Art, vol. 5, 
pi. 972. 

Published: The History of Bookbinding 525-1950 a.d., p. 40, no. 94, pi. xxn; 
Ettinghausen, "Near Eastern Book Covers," p. 126, pi. 12; Welch, The Art of Mughal 
India, pp. 26, 163, no. 7. 



111. 

BINDING FOR A KHAMSA (QUINTET) 
OF AMIR KHUSRAU DIHLAVI 
Scribe: Muhammad Husain 
Mughal, dated a.h. 1006 (1597-98) 
Lacquer over pasteboard, 11 ] A X 7-Yt in. 
(28.6 x 19.7 cm.) 

The Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore (W.624) 




Prince Salim's influence as a young man on his father's workshops must 
have spread beyond the painters' ateliers, even though his first love was 
painting. His influence would also have extended to the armorers, jade 
workers, and carpet weavers, and the designers who provided them with 
motifs. 

Although both Akbar and Salim, as well as their artists, would have 
been well versed in the technical problems inherent in each discipline, they 
were also daringly innovative. The patron — and we sense Prince Salim's 
aesthetic acumen here — and artist responsible for this magnificent carpet 
approached the difficult challenge of combining traditional arabesques and 
pictorialism with admirable sensitivity and discrimination. Excitedly aware, 
certainly, of European tapestries, they avoided the pitfall of creating a woven 
miniature rather than a suitably two-dimensional carpet design. And they 
achieved a movingly lyrical work of art. 

The composition and the drawing of birds, trees, and arabesques all 
point to a late sixteenth-century date, as does the thoughtful originality of 
conception, which far transcends later, primarily ornamental, pictorial car- 
pets, in which excellence of craftsmanship replaces divine spark. 1 

1. For a discussion of Safavid artists as carpet designers, see: Welch, "Two Shahs, 
Some Miniatures, and the Boston Carpet." 

Published: Riegl, Oriental Carpets, no. 1, pi. 1; Sarrc and Trenkwald, Old Oriental 
Carpets, vol. 1, pis. 35, 36; The Arts of Islam, p. 116, no. 98; Gans-Ruedin, Indian 
Carpets, pp. 76-77. 



112. 

LANDSCAPE CARPET 

Mughal, late 16th century 

Cotton warp and weft, wool pile, 7 ft. 8V2 in. X 

6W2 in. (2.35 m. x 156.2 cm.) 

Osterreichisches Museum fur angewandte 

Kunst, Vienna (Or. 292) 



Most portrayals of Akbar show him actively doing things — hunting, lead- 
ing armies, directing building programs, or receiving distinguished guests. 
Here, in his early sixties, gray and worn, he leans against a bolster within a 
red sandstone throne-pavilion. He receives a dignified and serious gentle- 
man identifiable as c Ali of Gilan, his doctor, who probably came to discuss 
the stomach condition from which Akbar died in 1605. In the foreground, a 
sleek hunting dog turns away from an attendant bearing a matchlock, aware 
that it is not the time for an outing. Behind stand two fond grandsons, 



113. 

AKBAR IN OLD AGE 

Inscribed: "the work of Manohar Das" 

Mughal, ca. 1605 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 9% x 5Vh in. (24.5 X 14.8 cm.) 

Miniature: 7 l A X 4% in. (18.4 x 12.1 cm.) 

Cincinnati Art Museum, Gift of John J. Emery 

(1950.289a) 




113 



Prince Khusrau, age eighteen, waving a chauri (yak-tail fly whisk) — an ob- 
ject both practical and symbolically regal — and thirteen-year-old Prince 
Khurram. The former, after rebelling against his father, died young from 
drink, the family weakness; the latter, who is known to have been particu- 
larly close to his grandfather, eventually reigned as Shah Jahan, and can be 
seen further on in imperial grandeur occupying his Peacock Throne, an 
elaboration, characteristically extravagant, of Akbar's austere platform (see 
no. 154). Both young men look gravely concerned about their grandfather's 
health, and one wonders if they were aware of the dread rumor at court 
that to hasten his own path to the throne their father, Prince Salim, was 
poisoning the emperor. 

Manohar's pensively affectionate characterization of Akbar, under whose 
patronage he had grown up, may be the very one that established the model 
for posthumous portraits. Endowed with much of his father Basawan's 
psychological understanding, he recorded Akbar's pained but mannerly re- 
solve and malaise, and the doctor's concerned humility. Khusrau's already 
puffy face is shadowed by underlying impatience and hostility; Khurram, 
even then bejeweled, appears conscientious, aristocratic, every inch a 
sovereign. 

Published: Beach, The Grand Mogul, pp. 132-33, fig. 11; Welch, Imperial Mughal 
Painting, p. 69, pi. 15. 



114. 

THE BIRTH OF JAHANGIR 

From a manuscript of the Tuzuk-i Jahangiri 

(The Memoirs of Jahangir) 

Attributed to Bishndas 

Mughal, ca. 1615-20 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 9 7 A x 6 7 /* in. 
(25 x 17.6 cm.) 

Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Francis Bartlett 
Donation of 1912 and Picture Fund (14.657) 



When Prince Salim inherited the throne as Emperor Jahangir (World Seizer), 
like his father he commissioned an illustrated account of the events of his 
reign, a manuscript known to us only from a dozen or so miniatures, many 
of them damaged. Consciously connoisseurly in his enthusiasm for the arts 
and a passionate collector, Jahangir swiftly adjusted the imperial workshops, 
releasing many artists whose work did not meet his standards, and welcom- 
ing "old masters" such as Manohar, whose careers he had encouraged and 
influenced when he had access to his father's ateliers at Lahore and Agra. 
Large numbers of proficient painters trained in the imperial studios found 
work elsewhere, some in the bazaars of Agra or at Rajput courts in Rajasthan, 
others in Central India or the Punjab, thus disseminating the Mughal style 
far and wide. 

Jahangir 's approach to life and art differed greatly from Akbar's. While 
Akbar had inherited a small, virtually unestablished realm at fourteen, Jahangir 
was thirty-six when his father left him a vast, superbly organized, smoothly 
functioning, and rich dominion that required little more than supervision. 
Its problems were barely discernible signs of institutional aging and of built-in 
factors such as the recurrent struggles for power within the imperial household. 
The scramble for the throne by Emperor Humayun's brothers and their fac- 
tions was repeated through the generations, forcing successive emperors to 
cruel decisions. Rivals were blinded, murdered, or imprisoned in Gwalior 
Fort, where oblivion and eventual death followed daily doses of poust — an 
opium concoction enjoyed by Akbar and Jahangir in smaller quantities. 
Conceivably, these skeletons in the Mughal closets encouraged the hyper- 
aestheticism that made uncertain, perhaps brief, imperial lives as blissful as 
possible. But they may also have sparked spiritual concerns, the other side 
of cruelty. Jahangir's candid, erratic, often painfully realistic, and at times 
self-deluding memoirs, the Tuzuk-i Jahangiri, describe his reverence for holy 
men, whom he often visited, as well as terrible episodes, as when he ordered 
rebellious Prince Khusrau's followers to be impaled, and forced the prince to 
watch their agonies. 

The trivia recorded in Jahangir's memoirs and paintings surprise and 
delight: a combat between a spider and a snake encountered on the roadside ; 
his beloved wife Nur-Jahan's Annie Oakley-like marksmanship; the sending 
of his portrait to the rival sultan of Bijapur "so that [he might] see me 
spiritually"; a jeweled rose; a boy raised from the dead by a holy man; a 
corpse that would not rot; and a yogi who copulated with a tiger — all arc 
described in lively detail. Although Jahangir was not catalyzed by challenges 



182 




114 



equal to those his father faced, he may have been as intelligent, and assuredly 
he was at least as curious about the world. 

The Birth of Jahangir is one of the fullest revelations of harem life, 
piling vignettes of wifely and motherly behavior atop anecdotal observa- 
tions on astrologers, maidservants, and infantdom. Where else can one find 
a gold crib set with precious stones, or see exactly how neem leaves were 
mounted over gateways to celebrate a birth? When Bishndas recorded all 
this, and far more, for the official illustrated history of the reign, one can be 
sure that he did so with Jahangir often at his side. Of all the documentary- 
minded emperors, in a dynasty that kept as many records as the Romans, 
Jahangir was the most insistent upon lively accuracy and completeness. 

Published: Coomaraswamy, Catalogue of the Indian Collections: VI, p. 17, no. 14.657, pi. 
in; Welch, The Art of Mughal India, pp. 71, 166, no. 26; Beach, The Grand Mogul, p. 
63, no. 15; Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pp. 70-71, pi. 16. 



115. 

EMPEROR JAHANGIR IN DARBAR 

From a manuscript of the Tuzuk-i Jahangiri 

(The Memoirs of Jahangir) 

Attributed to Manohar 

Inscribed: "done by the most humble of the 

house-born" 

Mughal, ca. 1620 

Opaque watercolor on paper, \3 3 A X 7 3 / 4 in. 
(34.8x19.8 cm.) 

Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Francis Bartlett 
Donation of 1912 and Picture Fund (14.654) 



Akbar's court at Fatehpur-Sikri must have seemed informal or even casual; 
but as the empire matured, it became harder for visitors to approach the 
emperor. By 1620, no stranger could bypass the system of guards and 
attendants who screened would-be guests. Ordinarily, the emperor could be 
viewed daily from a distance when he appeared briefly at the jharoka window 
of the ramparts and gazed down to assure the multitudes of his continuing 
presence and good health. Closer inspection of the emperor was possible at 
formal audiences, or darbars, as shown here — under strictly controlled 
conditions. Family members and close attendants stood nearest to the royal 
presence; distinguished foreign visitors and courtiers were arranged on a 




lower level, according to rank and prestige; and less important visitors were 
placed yet farther away, beyond a railing. 

William Finch, who visited India between 1608 and 1611, described his 
experience as a visitor: "[After passing through a third gate] you enter into a 
spacious court with atescannas round about, like shops or open stalls, wherein 
[Jahangir's] captaines according to their degrees keep their seventh day chokees 
[watch]. A little further you enter within a rayle into a more inward court, 
within which none but the Kings addees and men of sort are admitted, 
under paine of swacking by the porters cudgells, which lay on load without 
respect of persons. Being entred, you approach the Kings derbar or seat, 
before which is also a small court inclosed with railes, covered over head 
with rich semianes to keep away the sunne; where aloft in a gallery the King 
sits in his chaire of state, accompanied with his children and Chiefe Vizier 
(who goeth up by a short ladder forth of the court), no other without calling 
daring to goe up to him, save onely two punkaws to gather wind; and right 
before him on a scaffold is a third, who with a horse taile [in fact, yak tail] 
makes havocke of the poore flies. On the right hand of the King, on the wall 
behind him, is the picture of our Saviour; on the left of the Virgin. Within 
these railes none under the degree of foure hundred horse are permitted to 
enter." 1 

Jahangir urged his artists to paint him realistically, as is apparent in this 
mirror-accurate portrait, with its pouched eyes, incipient jowels, benevolent 
majesty — and grandfatherliness. For he gazes thoughtfully upon four-year- 
old Shah Shuja c , who had narrowly escaped serious injury when he fell from 
a fort window but was spared by landing on a carpet spreader and his carpet, 
an episode described in the doting grandparent's memoirs. 

1. Finch, in Foster, Early Travels in India, p. 184. 

Published: Welch, The Art of Mughal India, p. 167, no. 30; Beach, The Grand Mogul, 
pp. 61-63, no. 14; Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pp. 72-73, pi. 17. 



One winter, on seeing an elephant shivering during its bath, Emperor 
Jahangir ordered that henceforth the water be warmed; and in comparably 
benevolent mood, realizing his inaccessibility to people in need, he ordered 
golden bells to be made, with a golden "Chain of Justice" reaching down to 
a spot near the Jamuna River, so that petitioners could attract his attention. 

As portrayed by Jahangir's favorite artist, Abu'l-Hasan, one of "the 
house-born" whose precocious talent had been nurtured since childhood by 
Emperor Jahangir, the effect of this nobly intentioned plan was not wholly 
successful. The elephant seems to laugh as crowds of courtiers, tidily ar- 
ranged by seniority, gather for a morning view of the emperor at his jharoka 
(window of appearances), while a servant armed with a stick drives away 
the bell-ringing rabble. 

The left-handed Abu 3 l-Hasan, along with Mansur and Farrukh Beg, 
was one of the emperor's most admired artists. Jahangir wrote of him in the 
Tuzuk: "On this day Abu-l-Hasan, the painter, who has been honoured with 
the title Nadiru-z-Zaman, drew the picture of my accession as the frontis- 
piece of the Jahangir-nama, and brought it to me. As it was worthy of all 
praise, he received endless favours. His work was perfect, and his picture is 
one of the chefs-d'oeuvres of the age. At the present time he has no rival or 
equal. . . . His father, Aqa Riza 3 i of Herat, at the time when I was a prince, 
joined my service. There is, however, no comparison between his work and 
that of his father. . . . My connection was based on my having reared him, 
till his art arrived at this rank. . . . Truly he has become Nadiru-z-zaman ('the 
wonder of the age')." 1 

Abu 3 l-Hasan's pictures run the gamut of Mughal subjects. Here, we see 
his astonishing mastery of a densely packed, humorously anecdotal histori- 
cal view; but he was also a subtly objective analyst of people, as is apparent 
from his portrait studies; and his natural history pictures match those of the 
more specialized Mansur. No other artist tells us as much about Jahangir's 
palaces, textiles, and weapons and other objects. The view of Agra Fort, for 



116. 

EMPEROR JAHANGIR AT THE JHAROKA 
WINDOW 

From a manuscript of the Tuzuk-i Jahangiri 

(The Memoirs of Jahangir) 

Inscribed: "Nadir az-Zaman" 

(Wonder of the Time) 

Mughal, ca. 1620 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 21 7 /« x 13 3 / 4 in. (55.5 x 35 cm.) 

Miniature: 12% X 7 7 /s in. (31.2 X 20 cm.) 

Collection Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, Geneva 




instance, is fascinatingly accurate. From it one knows, for example, that the 
Khas Mahal pavilion was based upon a canopied prototype, and that the 
essential form of the Samman Burj, from which the emperor looks down, 
existed during Jahangir's reign. 

1. Jahangir, The Tuzuk, vol. 2, p. 20. 

Published: Delhi Museum of Archaeology, Loan Exhibition, p. 92, no. C.508, pi. 
xxxvm(a); Martin, The Miniature Painting, vol. 2, pi. 216 left; Beach, The Grand 
Mogul, pp. 64, 91; Welch and Welch, Arts of the Islamic Book, pp. 212-15, no. 70. 



117. 

ANUP RAI SAVES THE LIFE OF EMPEROR 
JAHANGIR DURING A LION HUNT 
Attributed to Abu^l-Hasan 
Mughal, ca. 1610 

Brush and ink with color on paper, 7 x 7 l A in. 
(17.9x18.5 cm.) 
Private collection 



Abu'l-Hasan, son of a well-known Iranian artist in Jahangir's service, Aqa- 
Riza Jahangiri, grew up under the emperor's artistic guidance. Precocious, 
he drew and painted masterfully by the age of thirteen; and along with the 
imperial flora and fauna specialist, Mansur, who was given the title Nadir 
al- c Asr (Wonder of the Age), he was in the forefront of Jahangir's artists. 
Abu'l-Hasan often accompanied his patron, whether on visits to Kashmir or 
shorter expeditions to the hunting field. During Jahangir's fifth regnal year, 
the artist might have gone with his patron and Prince Khurram on a late 
afternoon hunt, which provided the incident depicted here and is described 
in the Tuzuk: "Anup Ray . . . one of my close attendants was heading the 
men who were with him in the hunt . . . when ... he saw a half-eaten bullock. 



186 



Near it a huge, powerful lion fsher] got up out of a clump . . . and went off. 
[Knowing of] my liking for lion-hunting, he and some of those who were 
with him surrounded the lion and sent someone ... to give me the news .... 
I rode there at once in a state of excitement and at full speed, and Baba 
Khurram [Prince Khurram] . . . and one or two others went with me. On 
arriving I saw the lion standing in the shade of a tree, and wished to fire at 
him from horseback but found that my horse was unsteady, and dismounted 
and aimed and fired my gun. As I was standing on a height and the lion 
below, I did not know whether it had struck him or not. In a moment of 
excitement I fired the gun again, and I think that this time I hit him. The lion 
rose and charged, and wounded the chief huntsman, who had a falcon on his 
wrist and happened to be in front of him, sat down again in his own place. In 
this state of affairs, placing another gun on a tripod, I took aim. Anup Ray 
stood holding the [gunjrest, and had a sword in his belt and a baton in his 
hand. Baba Khurram was a short distance off to my left, and Ram Das and 
other servants behind him. . . . When I was about to fire, the lion came 
roaring towards us and charged. I immediately fired. The ball passev chrough 
the lion's mouth and teeth. The noise of the gun made him very savage, and 
the servants . . . fell over one another, so that I, through their pushing and 
shock, was moved a couple of paces from my place and fell down. In fact, I 
am sure that two or three of them placed their feet on my chest and passed 
over me. I c timad Ray and the huntsman Kamal assisting me, I stood up. At 
this moment, the lion made for those who were on the left hand side. Anup 




Ray let the [gunjrest slip out of his hand and turned towards the lion. The 
lion, with the same activity with which he had charged, turned on him, and 
he manfully faced him, and struck him twice with both hands on the head 
with the stick he had in his hand. The lion, opening his mouth, seized both 
of Anup Ray's arms with it, and bit them so that his teeth passed through 
both, but the stick and the bracelets on his arms were helpful, and did not 
allow his arms to be destroyed. From the attack and pushing of the lion 
Anup Ray fell down between the lion's fore-feet, so that his head and face 
were opposite the lion's chest. At this moment, Baba Khurram and Ram 
Das came up to the assistance of Anup Ray. The prince struck the lion on the 
loins with his sword, and Ram Das also struck him twice with his sword. . . . 
On the whole, it was very warm work. . . . Anup Ray with force dragged 
his arms out of the lion's mouth and struck him two or three times on the 
cheek with his fist, and rolling over on his side stood up by the force of his 
knees. . . . When he stood up, the lion also stood up and wounded him on 
the chest with his claws, so that these wounds troubled him for some days." 

But the lion was far from dead. When a lampman, on his evening rounds, 
chanced upon the scene, the lion knocked him down. And, according to the 
Tuzuk, "to fall and give up this life were the same thing. [But] other people 
came in and finished the lion's business. As Anup Ray had done this service 
to me and I had witnessed the way in which he offered his life, after he had 
recovered from the pain of his wounds and had the honour of waiting on 
me, I bestowed on him the title of Anira'i Singh-dalan. Anira 5 i they call in 
the Hindi language the leader of an army, and the meaning of Singh-dalan is 
a lion-slayer." 1 

Abu 3 l-Hasan's interpretation of the episode transforms it into a guard- 
edly naturalistic ballet, choreographed to the imperial taste. Jahangir trots 
bravely onto the scene, matchlock in hand; Prince Khurram single-handedly 
slashes the lion; Anup Rai with utmost composure retains his dignity before 
the imperial gaze and beneath the crushing weight of the terrifying animal. 
The artist's quick eye for gesture, his lilting but accurate brushed line, the 
logical spatial composition, and the solid grounding of figures who firmly 
grip sword and matchlock support the attribution to Abu 3 l-Hasan. 

1. Jahangir, The Tuzuk, vol. 1, pp. 185-88, where the word "sher" is incorrectly 
translated as "tiger." 

Published: Hofer, "A Collector," p. 35, fig. 15. 



118. 

EMPEROR JAHANGIR WEIGHS PRINCE 
KHURRAM 

From a manuscript of the Tuzuk-i Jahatigiri 

(The Memoirs of Jahangir) 

Attributed to Manohar 

Mughal, ca. 1610-15 

Opaque watcrcolor on paper 

Folio: 17-y« x 11% in. (44. 2 X 29.7 cm.) 

Miniature: \VA X 5 in. (28.4 X 12.8 cm.) 

The Trustees of the British Museum, Bequest 

of P. C. Manuk Esq. and Miss G. M. Coles, 

through the National Art Collections Fund 

(1948.10-9069) 



Emperor Jahangir described this episode, which took place in 1607, in the 
Tuzuk: "On Friday ... 1 came to the quarters of Khurram [later, Shah Jahan], 
which had been made in the Urta Garden. In truth, the building is a delight- 
ful and well-proportioned one. Whereas it was the rule of my father to have 
himself weighed twice every year, [once] according to the solar and [once 
according to the] lunar year, and to have the princes weighed according to 
the solar year, and moreover in this year, which was the commencement of 
my son Khurram's sixteenth lunar year, the astrologers and astronomers 
represented that a most important epoch according to his horoscope would 
occur, as the prince's health had not been good, I gave an order that they 
should weigh him according to the prescribed rule, against gold, silver, and 
other metals, which should be divided among faqirs [Muslim holy men] and 
the needy. The whole of the day was passed in enjoyment and pleasure in the 
house of Baba Khurram, and many of his presents were approved." 1 

Jahangir's artists vied with one another to please their demanding but 
appreciative patron, whose eye searched out such details as the portrayal of 
the blanc de chine figurines in the niches, or the array of presents offered to 
him by the prince. He would also have scrutinized, and admired, the remark- 
able golden scales, the portraits, and the ethereal patch of garden. 

We attribute this informative and touching miniature to Manohar, the 
son of Basawan, who had become one of Jahangir's finest portrait painters. 
Although his work is found in most of Jahangir's albums and manuscripts, 
he was not singled out for mention in the memoirs. It seems likely that he 



188 




118 



189 



not only responded, as here, to the challenge of Abu 3 l-Hasan's extraordi- 
nary historical scenes but sensed that no other artist could equal that "Wonder 
of the Age" in their patron's esteem. 2 (For other work by Manohar, see nos. 
113, 115; for Abu 3 l-Hasan, see nos. 116, 117.) 

1. Jahangir, The Tuzuk, vol. 1, p. 115. 

2. For Manohar, sec: Beach, The Grand Mogul, pp. 130-37. 

Published: Barrett and Gray, Painting of India, pp. 103-4; Paintings from the Muslim 
Courts, pp. 68-69, no. 112; Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pp. 74-75, pi. 18; The 
Indian Heritage, p. 37, no. 40, pi. 2. 



119. 

WINE BOWL (JAM) 

Mughal, probably 1st quarter of 17th century 
Copper, height 6V2 in. (16.5 cm.), diameter 
13 5 /8 in. (34.6 cm.) 

Trustees of the Prince of Wales Museum of 
Western India, Bombay (56.61) 




Amply proportioned, seductively curved, and balancing on an elegantly 
small foot, this bowl is unsurpassed in quality by other early Mughal 
copperwork. Its hunting frieze of horsemen and attendants pursuing deer and 
of an elephant carrying a caged lion in a craggy landscape is vividly executed; 
and both the arabesques and Nasta c liq calligraphy are superb — fit for royal use. 

Easy to enjoy as a work of art, the bowl has challenged those determined 
to date and place it with precision. Recently, however, A. S. Melikian-Chirvani 
has studied the piece and arrived at convincing conclusions. He points out 
that both the shape and the engraving are strongly Western Iranian in style. 
Indeed, were it not for the characteristically Mughal hunting scene it would 
be assigned to a Safavid workshop. He believes the hunt to be in honor of a 
Safavid prince, and suggests that the bowl may have been commissioned as a 
gift to a member of the Safavid royal family. 

The inscriptions, echoing the engraved scenes, support his theory. 
Although most of the Mughals belonged to the Sunni sect as opposed to the 
Shi c ite, a Shi c ite prayer alternates with Shi c itc invocations in the upper regis- 
ter of calligraphy and other inscribed lines are from a Saqi-nama (Invocation 
of the Cupbearer), a mystical poem in praise of wine. Four of the twelve 
distichs are by Hafiz (d. 1389), Iran's most famous lyrical poet. 

Inasmuch as Melikian-Chirvani argues that several of the other verses 
are from the Tazkira-yi Meykhana (and appear in precisely the same order), 




an anthology composed by the Persian poet Molla Fakhr az-Zaman-i Qazvini 
in Patna in 1618-19, he finds it difficult to assign an earlier date to the bowl 
— despite the rather crudely incised inscription added after its completion, 
saying that it had been donated to the shrine of Ba 'Abdullah Husain by one 
Safiya Begum "in the year 991" (1583). On the basis of style and costume, 
the earlier date is clearly unreliable, and Melikian-Chirvani suspects that the 
clumsy engraver may have intended it to read as 1101 (1689). 

In principle, we fully agree with him, while adding that the engraved 
animals, figures, and landscape are somewhat archaic in style, and were it 
not for the inscriptions and costumes — incontrovertible evidence— we should 
be content with a date closer to 1600. The bowl's strongly Iranian flavor is 
fully consistent with Jahangir's court, where a powerful Iranian faction associ- 
ated with the emperor's favorite wife, Nur-Jahan, belonged to the Shi c ite 
sect. 

Published: Chandra, "Two Early Mughal Metal Cups," pp. 57-60; M. Chandra, 
Indian Art, pi. lxviii; The Indian Heritage, p. 144, no. 488; Mittal, "Indo-Islamic 
Metal and Glassware," p. 71, no. 23. 



Pierced stone screens were useful and appealing Indian architectural elements 120. 
long before the Mughal period. They cast mysterious, ever changing pat- JALI 

terns of light and shade as the sun moved by day or lantern bearers passed by Mughal, probably Agra, ca. 1610 

night. Practical, too, jalis allowed gentle breezes to flow, cooling in the summer !^! ar . . e ' . X ^ 6 { 2 j n ' Xf> 7 , 

& . ■ • , i, , r a The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 

and warming in the cold season; and they gave a degree ot privacy. At court, Rogers Fund (1984 193) 

where intrigue and flirtatiousness flourished, their peepholes catalyzed guards, 

servants, the amorously bold, and the coy. 

Architects and stonecutters, with ingenuity and skill, created jalis in a 

great variety of shapes, sizes, and patterns, which can be dated decade by 

decade. Those made for Akbar at Fatehpur-Sikri, for instance, are ruggedly 

geometric, masterly cut but powerfully simple; while Jahangir's gained in 

refinement, delicacy, and precision, at the same time retaining Akbari might. 

Shah Jahan preferred floral and arabesque motifs, virtuosic and graceful (see 

no. 164). 

Zigzagging diagonals in the present example set up a powerful waving 
rhythm that sets spinning the interlocking rosettes and crosses. Like all excel- 
lent jalis, this one encourages the eye and mind to roam, and to discover the 
idiosyncratic, inner repertoire of forms. It was cut from a large slab of 
makrana marble quarried near Jaipur, and it can be dated on the basis of 
identically patterned red sandstone windows in Akbar's tomb at Sikandra. 
That splendid complex was commissioned by Jahangir and visited by him 
during the third regnal year. Considering the ambiguity of feeling between 
the father and son, it is particularly interesting to read the latter's comments 
in the Tuzuk: "I went on foot [probably from Agra, a distance of five miles] 
on my pilgrimage to the enlightened mausoleum of the late King. If it had 
been possible, I would have traversed this road with my eyelashes and head. 
My revered father, on account of my birth, had gone on foot on a pilgrim- 
age to the shrine of Khwaja Mu c in ud-Din Sanjari Chishti, from Fathpur to 
Ajmir, a distance of 120 kos [about 200 miles]: if I should traverse this road 
with my head and eyes, what should I have done? When I was dignified with 
the good fortune of making this pilgrimage, I saw the building that had 
been erected in the cemetery. It did not come up to my idea of what it ought 
to be, for that would be approved which the wayfarers of the world should 
point to as one the like of which was not in the inhabited world. Inasmuch 
as at the time of erecting the aforesaid building the affair of the ill-starred 
Khusrau took place, I started for Lahore, and the architects had built it after 
a design of their own. At last ... a large sum was expended, and work went 
on for three or four years. I ordered that experienced architects should again 
lay the foundations ... on a settled plan. By degrees, a lofty building was 
erected, and a very bright garden was arranged round the building of the 
shrine, and a large and lofty gateway with minarets of white stone was 
built. On the whole they told me the cost of this lofty edifice was 1,500,000 
rupees." 1 



191 



It is likely that the Metropolitan Museum jali was made for Jahangir's 
private apartments in Agra Fort, a section of the palace replaced by order of 
Shah Jahan. Architectural elements of this quality, satisfying in themselves 
as sculpture, suggest the character and quality of Mughal buildings. 
Presumably, this jali was stored in Agra Fort until, after Mughal power had 
weakened during the second half of the eighteenth century, it was carried 
away by looters. 

1. Jahangir, The Tuzuk, vol. 1, pp. 151-52. 



Life-sized and made from a single great lump of jade, this powerfully 
carved sculpture stands apart from most other Mughal hardstone objects, 
which were made for use. It is tempting to suppose that it was commis- 
sioned to enhance the water channels of a princely garden. The sculptor ob- 
served a living terrapin with typical Mughal intensity, and conveyed its 
unhurried spirit and movements down to the slight but characteristic turn of 
the head and the gait of its webbed, flipperlike feet. 

Uninscribed and unique, the terrapin is difficult to date and place. Ac- 
cording to records in the British Museum for June 12, 1830, it was "brought 
from India by Lieutenant Gen. Kyd, found in a tank and brought to him 
while working on fortifications of Allahabad." Clearly Mughal in style, it 
was probably made at Allahabad, built by Akbar's order and long a provin- 
cial Mughal center crowned by a fortress overlooking the confluence of the 
Ganges and Jamuna rivers. In the early seventeenth century, Allahabad was 
Prince Salim's capital when he rebelled against his father; and in 1622, his 
eldest son Khusrau died there, perhaps a victim of Shah Jahan's ambition. 
Inasmuch as the terrapin is a noble object and would have suited his taste, it 
is likely to have enlivened Prince Salim's gardens there. The compact mass- 
ing of simplified, naturalistic forms and the expansive energy invite compari- 
son to the bronze lion (no. 96), which argues for an early date. 

Published: "Exhibition of Islamic Jades," pp. 202-3. 

I am indebted to Michael Rogers for supplying crucial information for this entry; 
Rogers independently assigned an early date to this frequently neglected object. 



121. 

JADE TERRAPIN 
Mughal, early 17th century 

7 7 Ax 19% x 12 5 /sin 
(20x48.5x32 cm.) 

Trustees of the British Museum, London 
(1830.6-1.6) 




121, side 




121, front 



193 



122 



122. 

INKPOT OF EMPEROR JAHANGIR 
Inscribed, in cartouches around the body: "for 
King Jahangir [son of) King Akbar in the 
fourteenth year of Jahangir's reign correspond- 
ing with the year 1028 of the Flight the form 
[of the inkpot] attained completion"; under the 
foot: "the work of Mu'min in the service of 
Jahangir" 

Mughal, dated a.h. 1028 (1618-19) 
Dark green nephrite, mounted in gold, height 
2 l A in. (6.4 cm.), diameter 3V 4 in. (8.3 cm.) 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
The Sylmans Collection, Gift of George Coe ' 
Graves (29.145.2) 



For years on end, Jahangir never handled a knife, cup, or buckle, never 
wore a turban, shoe, or robe that would not now grace an art museum. This 
compact, powerfully rounded jade inkpot, just the right size and weight for 
ink, and to dip reed pens into without tipping it over, may have been used 
by the emperor when writing his Tuzuk or signing imperial decrees. Although 
Jahangir is better known as a lover of painting, he was an equally discerning 
admirer of useful but superb objects. 

In the Tuzuk, objets de vertu are mentioned as frequently as pictures or 
architecture; and inspecting those made or collected for him was part of his 
daily round. India's genius for sculpture was expressed during the Mughal 
period in objects of this sort, which are imbued with the same serious grasp 
of form and understanding of nature admired in the arts of other periods in 
less deceptively "ornamental" or even "frivolous" guise. 

A very hard stone, difficult and slow to work, nephrite was imported 
from Khotan and from the K'un-lun Mountains on the southern border of 
Sinkiang, where it was found in river beds into which it had tumbled due to 
erosiom It is still worked by craftsmen in Agra and Varanasi (Banaras) They 
sit on the ground, first cutting the material into convenient form with a bow 
saw fitted with two metal strings and an abrasive of sand moistened with 
water Shaping and ornamenting is then accomplished with a bow lathe pow- 
ered by one hand pulling back and forth on the bow while the other holds 
the object against the cutting wheel. Hollowing out an object such as the 
inkpot was accomplished with drill-like implements, similarly powered (For 
a comparable bow being used by a turner, see no. 280b.) 

Published. Upton, "A Gift of Jade," p. 22; Skelton, "The Relations Between the 
Chinese and Indian Jade Carving Traditions," p. 104, pi. 27A; "Islamic Jade, " p. 48- 
A. Welch, Calligraphy in the Arts, pp. 184-85, no. 79; The Indian Heritage p 117 no' 



Although tobacco was brought to the Deccan by the Portuguese in the 
sixteenth century, it did not reach the Mughal court until 1604, upon which 
Akbar's physicians told him that it was bad for his health. Nevertheless, 
smoking became a favored pastime; Indian smokers particularly enjoyed aro- 
matic tobaccos in which spices, perfumes, and crude molasses syrup were 
blended. Conceivably, the cool-smoking water pipe developed from the an- 
cient Indian smoking technique in which the substance to be smoked was 
burned in a small clay vessel planted into the earth or snow and the smoke 
was drawn through a small tunnel dug into the soil by means of a tube or 
straw extension. Tobacco could also be inhaled through a hand-held chillum, 
made of clay or bronze, which was fitted into the opening on top of the base 
(see no. 270). 

The use of the huqqa was described in 1616 by Reverend Edward Terry, 
chaplain to Sir Thomas Roe, who was ambassador from King James I to the 
court of Jahangir: "They have little Earthen Pots [with] a narrow neck and 
an open round top, out of the belly of which comes a small spout, to the 
lower part of which they fill the Pot with water; then putting their Tobacco 
loose in the top, and a burning coal upon it, they having first fastned a very 
small strait hollow Cane or Reed . . . within that spout . . . the Pot standing 
on the ground, draw that smoak into their mouths, which first falls upon the 
Superficies of the water, and much discolours it. And this way of making 
their Tobacco, they believe makes it more cool and wholsom." 1 

In 1811 another European traveler, Solvyns, wrote: "Cette maniere de 
fumer est extremement commune ... on la nomme Hubble de Bubble. " 2 What- 
ever the name, whether the onomatopoeic hubble-bubble or the more correct, 
originally Persian, huqqa, this paraphernalia led to the production of many 
works of art, none more splendid than this one. 

Shaped like the most perfect melon ever grown — we very nearly inhale 
its perfume — this dark green jade huqqa base was carved with walls thin as 
eggshell. Its expanding shape gives the semblance of growth, and one might 
suppose that the snakelike tube that once joined it to the mouthpiece was the 
stem by which it was nourished. Perfection of form invites speculation that 
it was made for Emperor Jahangir. 



123. 

HUQQA BASE 
Mughal, ca. 1620 

Dark green jade, height 6 in. (15.2 cm.), 

diameter 6 7 /h in. (17.5 cm.) 

J. K. Antiques and Curios Trust, Bombay 




123 



1. Yule and Burnell, Hobson-Jobson, p. 428. 

2. Ibid. 



To Jahangir, drinking cups were favorite possessions, imperial attributes; 
and new ones frequently were commissioned or received as gifts. In the 
Tuzuk, he wrote of a crystal cup acquired for him by a roaming agent in 
c Iraq. When Shah c Abbas I saw it, he told the Mughal ambassador that if 
"his brother [Jahangir] would drink wine out of it and send it to him, it 
would be a great mark of affection." 1 The cup was sent, after being fitted 
with a special lid and saucer. If the drinking of intoxicants was forbidden to 
most orthodox Muslims, many royal personages believed that upon touch- 
ing their lips they became water — and they were quaffed accordingly. 

The dark, very heavy, and massively solid Bharat Kala Bhavan cup was 
apparently designed to withstand the hazards of being dropped by a trembling 
hand. Jahangir was appealingly candid about his weaknesses. In the Tuzuk 
he wrote: "I had not drunk [wine] till I was fifteen [in fact, eighteen], except 
when in the time of my infancy two or three times my mother and wet- 
nurses gave it by way of infantile remedy . . . mixed with water and rose- 
water to take away a cough. . . . [Years later] when I had moved about a good 
deal and the signs of weariness had set in, a gunner . . . said to me that if I 
would take a cup of wine it would drive away the feeling of being tired and 
heavy. It was in the time of my youth, and as I felt disposed towards it 
ordered ... an intoxicating draught . . . the amount of one and a half cups of 
yellow wine of sweet taste in a little bottle. I drank it and found its quality 
agreeable. After that I took to drinking wine, and increased it from day to 
day until wine made from grapes ceased to intoxicate me, and I took to 
drinking arrack [potent spirits distilled from palm sap or rice] and by degrees 



124. 

OPIUM CUP OF EMPEROR JAHANGIR 
Inscribed, on the petals: "In the 12th year/of 
the accession/of Jahangir/corrcsponding 
to/Hijra 1026 [1617]/in the town of Mandu/ 
was engraved I pad-zahr [as an antidote to 
poison] /[this] most select object /Jahangir/ 
Padshah/ son of/ Akbar/Padshah 
Mughal, dated a.h. 1026 (1617) 
Dark green nephrite, gold pigment (perhaps a 
later addition), height 1 in. (2.6 cm.), diameter 
1% in. (4.9 cm.) 

Bharat Kala Bhavan, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi (5759) 



195 



my potions rose to twenty cups of doubly distilled spirits, fourteen during 

the daytime and the remainder at night In that state of matters no one had 

the power to forbid me, and . . . in that crapulous state from the excessive 
trembling of my hand I could not drink from my own cup, but others had to 
give it to me to drink, until I sent for Hakim [Dr.] Humam . . . and informed 
him of my state. 'Lord of the world' [he said] 'by the way in which you drink 
spirits, God forbid it, but in six months matters will come to such a pass 
that there will be no remedy for it.' As his words were said out of pure 
good-will, and sweet life was dear to me . . . from that day I began to lessen 
my allowance and set myself to take filuniya. In proportion as I diminished 
my liquor, I increased the amount of filuniya." 

But what is filuniya? Apparently, the word was synonymous with 
opium, of which, once he had reached the age of forty-six, he ate "eight 
surkhs [a red berry used as a weight] . . . when five gharis of the day have 
passed, and six surkhs after one watch of night." 2 Even if Jahangir's account 
of his wine and opium habits was written at a time of remorse, he must have 
been considerably addicted. And he was fully aware of the dangers of opium, 
as is apparent from such passages in the Tuzuk as the description of c Inayat 
Khan's death (see no. 149) and remarks on Jalal ad-Din Mas c ud, who died in 
1608: "He was an opium-eater, and used to eat opium after breaking it in 
pieces, like cheese, and it is notorious that he frequently ate opium from the 
hand of his own mother. " 3 A contemporary painting of Jahangir shows him, 
supported by girls in the harem, staggering about in cheerful obliviousness. 4 

Although inscribed at Mandu, the Bharat Kala Bhavan cup was not 
necessarily made there, even though its color, powerful rhythms, and simplified 
lotus form perfectly suit the mood of that great complex of fortified sultanate 
palaces. 

1. Jahangir, The Tuzuk, vol. 1, p. 374. 

2. Ibid., pp. 308-10. 

3. Ibid., pp. 141-42. 

4. The painting is in the Chester Beatty Library, Dublin. See: Arnold, The Library of 
A. Chester Beatty, vol. 2, pi. 56. 

Published: Morley, "On Applied Arts of India in Bharat Kala Bhavan," p. 114, 
pi. 10; Nigam, "The Mughal Jades of India," p. 81, fig. 15. 

I am extremely grateful to Robert Skelton for his precise description of the shape and 
material of this cup, as well as for his reading of the inscription. 




Emperor Jahangir's connoisseurship extended to calligraphy, the most ad- 
mired of all arts in the Islamic world, although his own unmistakable 
handwriting was more imperial than masterful (see no. 140 for a specimen). 
The sides of this superb small cup are inscribed with verses in Tughra script. 
They have been translated by Robert Skelton: "By command of His Majesty, 
the Great Khaqan, Lord of the Kings of the World, Manifestor of Divine 
Favors in the Offices of Caliphate and Kingdom, the Sun in the Firmament 
of World Sovereignty, the Moon in the Sky of Justice and Felicity, Abu 3 l- 
Muzaffar, son of King Akbar, Nur ad-Din Muhammad Jahangir the Emperor, 
Warrior of the Faith, the form of the cup attained completion [in the] year 
1016. " 1 The Persian quatrains are in four cartouches alternating with quatrefoils, 
which contain the inscription "The wine cup/of the Empcror/of the age/ 
second [regnal] year." The upper quatrain reads: "See, this cup's body im- 
bued with spirit — a jasmine leaf suffused with [purple of] the Judas tree. 
No, no, I err! Through extreme fineness the cup is watery [i.e., as limpid as 
water], pregnant with flowing fire [wine]." The lower quatrain reads: 
"Through wine, the tulip grows on thy face. It is like a rose petal: dew 
grows on it. If the hand which took the cup from thine should become dust, 
a cup will grow from it." 

The earliest dated wine cup among those that belonged to Jahangir, it is 
also the most restrained in spirit, representative of Jahangir's responsibly im- 
perial self. 

1. The Indian Heritage, p. 117, no. 350. 

Published: Sotheby's, London, December 16, 1971, lot 70; Skelton, "The Relations 
Between the Chinese and Indian Jade Carving Traditions," pp. 103-4, pi. 26d; The 
Indian Heritage, p. 117, no. 350; Metropolitan Museum of Art, The Guennol Collection, 
vol. 2, pp. 62-67. 



125. 

WINE CUP OF EMPEROR JAHANGIR 
Inscribed with verses, the titles of Jahangir, 
and the date 

Mughal, dated a.h. 1016 (1607-8) 
Mottled gray-green nephrite, height 2Vk in. 
(5.5 cm.), diameter 3 in. (7.5 cm.) 
The Brooklyn Museum, New York, 
Anonymous loan (L78.22) 



Never at a loss as to what to do, Emperor Jahangir one day shot a nilgai 
that contained two unborn fawns, he summoned the royal cooks to pre- 
pare a du-piyaza (meat cooked with onions), and later commented, "[It] 
certainly was not without flavour." 1 His interest in novelty was well known; 
and regularly as the tides, curiosities were brought to his attention. Accord- 
ing to the Tuzuk, "Masih uz-Zaman produced before me a cat, and repre- 
sented that it was a hermaphrodite, and that in his house it had young ones, 
and when it had connection with another cat, young were born to the latter. " 2 



126. 

WINE CUP OF EMPEROR JAHANGIR 

Mughal, dated a.h. 1021 (1612-13) 

Green hardstonc, height 2 7 /n in. (7.3 cm.), 

diameter 4-Va in. (12.2 cm.) 

Museum of Art, Rhode Island School of 

Design, Providence, Helen M. Danforth Fund 

(84.163) 



197 



Unusual materials were also brought — and often imaginatively trans- 
formed. Jahangir's opium cup (no. 124) probably came to him as a lump of 
pleasing stone, and in all likelihood the Rhode Island cup — shaped from a 
jadelike material supposed until recently to be rock crystal dyed green by 
some secret Indian technique — arrived the same way. Consultations with 
lapidaries followed, to plan the curve and thickness of the walls, the 
ornamentation, and the inscription, which may have been composed by the 
emperor himself. 

The shape is consistent with Jahangir's penchant for dignified, massive 
forms — a taste also evident in his buildings and throne platforms. Over it is 
engraved a delicate skin of ornament and calligraphy: eight arabesquelike 
flowering plants framed within graceful but forceful surrounds and six cou- 
plets inscribed in Nastaliq script. A lotus flower is engraved under the foot. 
The verses have been translated by Robert Skelton. 3 

On the upper band, beneath the rim: 

This is the cup of water [of life], nourisher of the soul, 

Of King Jahangir, [son] of King Akbar, 

Who can see from its shadow the dome of heaven. 

[It is] the world-displaying cup [i.e., Jamshid's cup] 

[Showing the events] on the face of the Earth. 

Having poured the cup of his munificence over the world, 

He has caused the fountain of the spirit to flow. 

Since this cup was completed at his command, 

May it be full of the Water of Life for ever. 

On the lower band, above the foot: 

May the seven climes be according to his desire. 
May his cup be passed around eternally. 

Its Hijra year is obtained from the numerical value of the words of the 
imprint, "The seventh year of the king's reign." 

1. Jahangir, The Tuzuk, vol. 2, p. 275. 

2. Ibid., vol. 1, p. 374. 

3. The Indian Heritage, p. 122, no. 372. 

Published: The Indian Heritage, p. 122, no. 372. 



127. 

JEWELED DAGGER AND SHEATH 
Perhaps by Puran and Kalyan 
Mughal, ca. 1619 

Watered steel blade, hatched and overlaid with 
koftgari work; hilt of gold; scabbard of wood 
overlaid with gold (back worked in repousse); 
hilt and scabbard engraved and set with ivory, 
agate, diamonds, rubies, emeralds, glass, and 
enamel, length 14 in. (35.5 cm.) 
The al-Sabah Collection, Dar al-Athar al- 
Islamiya, Kuwait National Museum (LNS.25.J) 



A stunning masterpiece of jewelrylike weapon making, this dagger must 
have been commissioned by Emperor Jahangir, perhaps in 1619. A micro- 
cosm for the belt, it is so inventively and intricately designed as to require 
hours of study to discover all its hidden trees, animals, birds, insects, flowers, 
and arabesques. The baluster-shaped hilt and pommel form a tree of life, 
burgeoning with birds and flowers, while the knuckle bow emerging from 
the finial of the quillon — a stylized elephant mask — is in the shape of a 
graceful horse's neck and head, barely touching the end of the pommel above. 
On the other side of the quillon a stylized tiger mask growls, its teeth of 
ivory and its tongue carved from one ruby, the inside of its throat and mouth 
set with three more. 

In the Tuzuk, Jahangir devotes many passages to daggers, which he 
presented to members of his family and to courtiers and also received as 
gifts. He mentions the skilled craftsmen who made them with the same high 
regard accorded his favorite artists, as indicated in a passage written in the 
fourteenth regnal year (1619): "I ordered the Ustads [masters] Puran and 
Kalyan, who had no rivals in the art of engraving, to make dagger-hilts of a 
shape that was approved at this time, and has become known as the Jahangiri 
fashion [probably the shape of the present hilt]. At the same time the blade 
and the sheath and fastening were given to skilful men, each of whom was 
unique in his age in his art. Truly, it was all carried out according to my 
wish. One hilt came out coloured in such a way as to create astonishment. It 
turned out of all the seven colours, and some of the flowers looked as if a 



198 



127 > 



skilful painter had depicted them in black lines round it with a wonder- 
working pencil. In short, it was so delicate that I never wish it to be apart 
from me for a moment. Of all the gems of great price that are in the trea- 
sury 1 consider it the most precious. On Thursday I girded it auspiciously 
and with joy round my waist, and the masters who in their completion had 
exercised great skill and taken great pains were rewarded, Ustad Puran with 
the gift of an elephant, a dress of honour, and a golden bracelet for the 
wrist, which the people of India call Kara, and Kalyan with the title of c Aja 
3 ib-dast [Wondrous Hand], and increased matisah [rank], a dress of honour, 
and a jewelled bracelet, and in the same way every one according to his 
circumstances and skill received favours." 1 

The quality of this magnificent dagger suggests that it may indeed have 
been made by these two great masters. The basic design, with its remark- 
able knuckle bow, is an intensely aesthetic development from the opulent 
but workmanly earlier form, shown in a portrait of Akbar's musician Tansen 
(no. 106) and exemplified by no. 98. The more refined shape no longer fits 
the hand as snugly, nor does the dagger seem so lethal; but Jahangir was less 
likely than his father to put a blade to the test. 

1. Jahangir, The Tuzuk, vol. 2, pp. 98-99. 

Published: Islamic Art in the Kuwait National Museum, p. 126. 



128. 

CEREMONIAL SPOON 
Mughal, early 17th century 
Gold, engraved and set with rubies, emeralds, 
and diamonds, length 7 '/6 in. (18.4 cm.) 
Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
(I. M. 173-1910) 

1. Personal communication, 1984. 

Published: Welch, The Art of Mughal India, pp. 31, 165, no. 20, pi. 20; Gascoigne, 
The Great Moghuls, p. 226; The Indian Heritage, p. 112, no. 322, pi. 12a. 



Similar to the al-Sabah dagger (no. 127) in workmanship and material, and 
probably from the same workshop, this spoon — except for the inside of the 
bowl — is adorned with an all-over skin of jeweled arabesques, without, 
however, the bird or animal forms. Anncmarie Schimmel has suggested that 
it might have been used to distribute sweets over which the Fatiha had been 
recited, and which therefore conveyed blessings, either in the name of the 
Prophet or of a saint. Less intricate than the dagger, it is likely to be earlier. 1 





128 



/a 





129 



Thumb rings were used in archery to release the arrow with precision; but 
they were also admired for their artistry, and presented as tokens of apprecia- 
tion by the emperors. One sees them not only in use (see no. 205) but also 
dangling ornamentally from a sash or patka (see no. 105), perhaps signaling 
the wearer's rank, or at least his closeness to the throne. 

This one is especially rich, the goldsmithing and jewel setting recalling 
those of Jahangir's daggers (nos. 127, 130, 133) and of the ceremonial spoon 
(no. 128). The inner surface is enameled with a design of acanthus leaves 
derived from Italian Renaissance ornament, as seen, for example, in the en- 
graved acanthus rinceaux of Enea Vico, probably struck in Rome in about 
1540. 1 Designs of this sort were frequently employed by Mughal designers 
and craftsmen, who must have had access to European pattern books. 

1. For possible sources of the Renaissance pattern, see: Byrne, Renaissance Ornament 
Prints and Drawings. The Windsor Castle Padshah-nama of c Abd al-Hamid Lahori 
(fols. 146v, 193v, and 216v) includes scenes of Jahangir and Shah Jahan giving audience 
near marble railings carved in relief with similar designs. All are by the artist Murad, 
whose name is inscribed on fob 193v as the pupil of Nadir az-Zaman (Abu 3 l-Hasan) 
and whose ornamental and architectural passages are so knowingly accomplished as 
to suggest that he was also employed as architectural designer. 

Published: Hambly, Cities of Mughal India, pp. 130-31, pi. 109; The Indian Heritage, p. 
109, no. 303. 



129. 

THUMB RING 

Mughal, ca. 1625 

Gold, chased and engraved and set with rubies 
and emeralds, the inside enameled in opaque 
white, blue, pale green, and black, height 
1 Vi in. (3.7 cm.), diameter 1 % in. (3 cm.) 
Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
(I. M. 207-1 920) 



Large in size, sturdy in construction, and inlaid with elegant but tautly 
designed arabesques, this dagger more effectively balances the ornamental 
and the utilitarian than the al-Sabah artistic tour de force (no. 127). After the 
late sixteenth century, hilts and blades of Mughal daggers were no longer 
made from a single piece of watered steel. Hilts took on additional impor- 
tance and splendor; and daggers, as is awesomely apparent from no. 127, 
had become collaborative efforts of armorers, jade workers, and jewelers. 
In Mughal and Rajput silahkanas (armories), blades were matched to hilts 
and were easily interchanged, their tangs held in place with resin. In a 
seventeenth-century miniature of a bazaar (Collection Howard Hodgkin), a 
shopkeeper offers a tidy row of dagger hilts ready for fitting to suitable 
blades. 1 Accumulations of dark grease on hilts suggest that daggers were 
covered with rust-preventing pomade for storage. 



130. 

JADE-HILTED DAGGER 
Mughal, ca. 1625 

Watered steel blade, hilt of light green nephrite 
inlaid with gold and jewels, length 16 5 /h in. 
(42.2 cm.) 
Private collection 



201 




202 



To adorn jade hilts, gold inlays, either shaped or as wire, were fitted 
into prepared grooves that were beveled to lock in the precious metal. Jewels 
were set into gold, held fast by similar beveling or crimped in by hammering 
of the soft metal. Gold was inlaid in steel by damascening, a technique also 
known as koftgari, by which a thin sheet of gold is applied by being deli- 
cately hammered into a surface prepared by filed hatchings. 

1. For the miniature, see: The Indian Heritage, p. 64, no. 160, pi. 4. 
Published: Hendley, Ulwar and Its Art Treasures, pi. xxxvn. 



Although Mughal and Persian portraits often show knives of this shape 
— along with more menacing daggers — at the belts of princes, human-headed 
finials were exceedingly rare. This one is so very similar to the kard worn by 
Prince Salim in a posthumous portrait painted for Shah Jahan by Bichitr 
(Victoria and Albert Museum, London) that one wonders if the artist did 
not employ it as the model, presumably at the suggestion of his patron, who 
would have inherited it. 1 The knife is fitted deeply into its richly decorated 
sheath, with only the superbly carved head, its hair arranged in snaillike 
ringlets, peeping out. The ferrule is inlaid in gold with a band of floral 
scrolls, chamfers with two fish. The finely watered blade is inlaid with the 
imperial parasol, which is often found in combination with imperial inscrip- 
tions and may indicate imperial ownership. 

The inscription on the blade tells us that the kard belonged to Shah 
Jahan. Born under most auspicious astrological circumstances — the conjunc- 
tion of the two felicities, Jupiter and Venus — he was known through his life 
as second Lord of the [Auspicious] Conjunction, the first having been his 
ancestor Timur. On the basis of style, it seems likely that this noble knife 
was commissioned by Jahangir for his heir — prior to February 22, 1621, 
when the emperor's increasing ill-will toward his son, encouraged by his 
all-powerful wife Nur-Jahan, came to a head. In a moment of drunkenness, 
Jahangir had turned over to him his younger brother and potential rival 
Sultan Khusrau, who died, probably of colic, while in his charge. Thereafter, 
Shah Jahan was known to his father as Bi-Daulat — the Wretch. 

1. For the portrait of Prince Salim, see: Hambly, Cities of Mughal India, p. 72, fig. 47. 
Published: The Indian Heritage, p. 128, no. 406. 



131. 
KARD 

Inscribed: "sahibqiran-i thani " 
Mughal, ca. 1620-30 

Watered steel blade inlaid with gold, jade hilt, 
length IIV2 in. (29.2 cm.) 
Private collection 




132 



Dazzling from afar, jewels can only be appreciated by intimate study. This 
teardrop-shaped Colombian emerald, of remarkable transparency and purity, 
was carved with a flower of trembling sensitivity, its petals and leaves as 
limpid as the material they adorn. Perhaps made as a pendant to a necklace, 
it might equally have been intended, as Manuel Keene has suggested, as a 
finial. 1 A miniature by Balchand in the Windsor Padshah-nama, of Jahangir 
receiving Shah Jahan prior to his campaign against Mewar, shows a eunuch 
behind the emperor holding up a rod terminating in a jeweled bird (folio 
43 v). 2 

1. Letter, January 1984. 

2. The miniature is unpublished. 



132. 

EMERALD WITH DESIGN OF A FLOWER 
Mughal, 2nd quarter of 17th century 
109.7 carats, P/s X l'/ 4 in. (3.6 x 3.2 cm.) 
The al-Sabah Collection, Dar al-Athar al- 
Islamiya, Kuwait National Museum 
(LNS.35.Hs) 



Mughal history occasionally chills the blood, telling us that however 
ravishingly artistic we find their talwars, katars, khanjars, and kards, the 
ed ges were kept serviceably sharp. When and where they were worn and 
how employed were symptomatic of the state of the Mughal ethos. During 
the early Akbar period, weapons were sported by the emperor and his circle, 
and usually peaceful men of letters or the arts carried arms — and for good 
reason. Abu 5 l-Fazl the biographer, who also served as a general, was am- 
bushed and hacked to death at the order of Prince Salim. Even Akbar occasion- 
ally drew his sword in hot blood, an act unimaginable by Emperor Jahangir, 
whose violent moods were given expression by accomplished specialists 



133. 

DAGGER 
Mughal, ca. 1620 

Watered steel blade; gold hilt, locket, and 
chape, inlaid with emeralds, rubies, spinels(?), 
and glass, length 14 in. (35.6 cm.) 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
Purchase, Harris Brisbane Dick Fund and The 
Vincent Astor Foundation Gift (1984.332) 



203 



1 33. derail 



133 



who knew how to stab or slash — and circumspectly carried out their mis- 
sions beyond the imperial eye. 

Gradually, an etiquette of weaponry evolved, and circumstances 
determined whether or not the emperor or courtier wore a dagger or knife, 
or carried a sword. In formal portraits of the Jahangir and Shah Jahan periods, 
both daggers and knives and often swords are worn as standard accouterments; 
even very young princes toy with weapons scaled to size. And at family 
gatherings, such as at the weighing of Prince Khurram (no. 118), the prince 
and his father have kards at their belts, but no daggers. Their prestigious 
courtiers, however, are fully equipped to protect the imperial family. On 
friendly formal occasions, the emperor wore a knife but not a dagger, and 
often a nearby attendant carried his sword, concealed in a sumptuous cloth 
bag like the one borne for Jahangir by c Inayat Khan (no. 148). It was consid- 
ered inappropriate for the emperor or prince, while visiting or receiving 
individual holy men, but when Shah Jahan honored his religious orthodoxy, 
he wore a dagger, and his sons and courtiers were fully armed. Mullas and 
holy men ordinarily did not bear arms. 

At a glance, one can read a dagger's significance. This splendid straight- 
bladed dagger is clearly from the imperial workshop, presumably commis- 
sioned by Jahangir for his own use. Less fantastic than the al-Sabah dagger 
(no. 127), with its birds, beasts, insects, and flowers, it nevertheless can be 
assigned, along with the ceremonial spoon (no. 128), to the same circle of 
craftsmen. In miniatures, both Jahangir and Shah Jahan often wear daggers 
of this type (see nos. 115, 117), which, with its bifurcated pommel, brings 
to mind Turkish yataghans as well as European examples. 



Jahangir took delight in unusual materials, which he eagerly collected and 
sometimes had made into useful objects, such as one dagger hilt sculpted 
from meteorite and another — the gift of Shah c Abbas I — created from a 
piebald "fish's tooth" (tortoiseshell?). He was thrilled to receive a "coloured 
tooth of great beauty [which] a stupid stranger bought in the open 
bazaar . . . for a trifle." 1 Mottled, crystallike narwhal ivory, from the sea uni- 
corn of the arctic Cetacea, must have intrigued the emperor, and it is not 
surprising therefore that an archer's thumb ring made from it is in the Jaipur 
armory. Adorned with angels bearing offerings at either side and a 
Michelangelesque face of Christ as Pantocrator at the front, it is percep- 
tively and very finely carved in the style of the early part of Jahangir's reign. 
A typical Mughal repeat pattern of trefoils surrounds the upper edge. 

1. Jahangir, The Tuzuk, vol. 2, p. 96. 

I would like to thank Asok Kumar Das for having called my attention to this piece, 
which he was the first to identify. 



134. 

THUMB RING 
Mughal, ca. 1615 

Narwhal ivory, height *A in. (2 cm.), diameter 
VA in. (4.5 cm.) 

Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 
(S.1950) 





134, front 



134, back 



205 



135 



135. 

CANDLESTICK 
Mughal, ca. 1625 

Bronze, height 4 3 A in. (12 cm.), diameter 5 in. 
(12.7 cm.) 

The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



Mughal art is best seen under the lighting conditions originally intended. 
This bronze candlestick — apparently the only such piece to have survived 
from Mughal times — should be seen at night, with its candle lit. Only then 
is the decoration on its sloping drum — a low relief of lively alternating 
poppy and iris plants framed by arches of graceful lance-shaped leaves 
— fhckeringly at its best. Basing the form upon classical Muslim prototypes, 
the designer and bronze caster softened and rounded the usually straight-edged 
profile, adding notes of sensuousness and intimacy. 

In Mughal pictures, one sees candlesticks arranged in rows; and it seems 
likely that the present example was one of a set. 



136. 

CARPET 
Mughal, ca. 1620 

Silk velvet on satin weave foundation, surfaced 
with metallic thread in twill, 15 ft. 3Vi m. X 8 ft. 6 in. 
(4.66 x 2.59 m.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
Purchase, Joseph Pulitzer Bequest (27.115) 



Jahangir, on a New Year's day, visited his brother-in-law Asaf Khan, who 
had covered the road between his house and the palace with gold brocade 
and velvet. This delicately sumptuous floor spread introduces us to an ex- 
traordinary tale of success at the Mughal court — and to the Iranian taste of 
Asaf Khan's sister, Nur-Jahan, the favorite wife of Emperor Jahangir, whose 
influence on Mughal art was almost as great as it was on the emperor. 

Born with the name Mehr un-Nisa, she was the daughter of Ghiyath 
Beg, an aspiring but untried Iranian nobleman, who brought her to Mughal 
India with the rest of his family. She became the young bride of Sher Afkan, 
whose accidental death in 1607 led to her moving from Bengal to the Mughal 
court as lady-in-waiting to one of Akbar's widows. There, in 1611, at a 
fancy bazaar at which the ladies coyly played at being shopkeepers, selling 
trinkets to the emperor and his family and to the nobles of the court, she met 
Jahangir, a mutually soul-stirring encounter. One of the great royal mar- 
riages of world history soon followed; and Mehr un-Nisa received the title 
Nur-Mahal (Light of the Palace), which was soon increased in refulgence to 
Nur-Jahan (Light of the World). Magnetic, witty, a crack shot with a 



206 




1 3(> 



matchlock, artistically discriminating, hardly selfless but socially responsi- 
ble (she established institutions for orphaned girls), she was above all subtle. 
And she enchanted her imperial husband, at whose side she was always present. 
When he, a Muslim ruler, struck coins bearing his own effigy holding a wine 
cup, it was considered extreme; but it was far more irregular when coins 
were minted in her name. 

The Metropolitan Museum carpet, with its scintillating eight-lobed 
medallions and floral rosettes, is one of a set of three (with those in the 
Museum of Decorative Art, Copenhagen, and the Musee du Louvre, Paris) 
that bring to mind the artistic character of one of the finest Mughal buildings, 
the tomb commissioned and closely supervised between 1622 and 1624 by 
Nur-Jahan for her mother and her father, I c timad ad-Daula (Pillar of 




136, detail 



207 



Government), one of Jahangir's most powerful nobles. Known for its pietra 
dura inlays in muted, often mottled buff, black, gray, and brown stone, it is 
preferred by many connoisseurs to the better-known Taj Mahal, the tomb 
of his granddaughter. Especially marvelous is the upper chamber, contain- 
ing the cenotaphs of the late chief minister and his wife. The walls are huge, 
richly geometric jalis, and the floor a stunningly bold, vital, but stately ara- 
besque in stone inlay for which the building is especially admired. The mind 
and eye that conceived this magnificent room — in which constant changes 
of light, by day and night, scatter rays through the screens, lending unearthly 
voices to the fugal pattern of the arabesques — would also have enjoyed the 
Metropolitan's superb carpet, with its once shimmering silver and gold threads 
playing against red velvet. 

Published: Dimand, "A Persian Velvet Carpet," pp. 247-51, no. 10; Gans-Ruedin, 
Indian Carpets, pp. 142-43. 

I am grateful to Edmund dc Unger, who on seeing this carpet several years ago 
suggested its Indian rather than Iranian origin. 



137. 

COURT COAT 

Mughal or Deccani, ca. 1630-60 

White satin, embroidered with colored silks in 

fine chain stitch, length 38'/* in. (97 cm.) 

Victoria and Albert Museum, London 

(I. S. 18-1947) 



Miraculously, it has survived. This resplendent coat is the only one of 
imperial quality that has come down to us from the age of Shah Jahan, at 
whose court magnificence was commonplace. The form of the coat, we 
have learned from Veronica Murphy, whose expertise is followed here, is 
that of a kurdi, of which there is a clear description in Jean-Baptiste Chardin's 
Travels in Persia, dating from the 1660s: "They put over the Robe a short, or 
close-bodied coat, and without sleeves, which they call Courdy. . . . These 
close-bodied coats are wide at Bottom, and narrow at Top, like Bells; they 
are made of cloth, or Gold Brocade, or a thick Sattin, and they daub them 
all over with Gold or Silver Lace, or Galloons, or they embroider them." 1 
The chain-stitch embroidery, repeated with slight but enlivening 




137 



variations, is in markedly Safavid style, reminding us of the close relation- 
ship between the Mughal court and Iran. Also significant is the Iranian 
background of Nur-Jahan and her niece Mumtaz-Mahal, which fostered the 
Mughal vogue for Iranian designs. But other Iranians also held high posi- 
tions in Mughal India, including Mirza Rustam, a relative of the Safavid 
royal family, whose daughter married Shah Jahan's son, Prince Shah Shuja c . 
Moreover, embassies came and went from Iran, invariably bearing and re- 
ceiving gifts; and it must not be forgotten that the sultans of the Deccan 
— especially those of Golconda (see nos. 209-16) — maintained close contact 
with the Safavids, and were clothed in styles that brought together Iranian, 
Mughal, and local characteristics. 2 

1. Chardin, Travels in Persia, pp. 212-16. 

2. For a related Golconda coat, with a fur collar such as this one might once have 
had, see: Raghaven, Srngaramanjarai of Saint Akbar Shah, pi. c. 

Published: The Art of India and Pakistan, p. 214, no. 1017, pi. 66; Irwin, Indian Embroi- 
dery, no. 1, fig. 1, pi. I; Welch, The Art of Mughal India, pp. 75, 169, no. 41; Victoria 
and Albert Museum, Indian Art, pi. 58; The Indian Heritage, pp. 94-95, no. 252. 



Mughal culture is too often interpreted as primarily mundane, emphasiz- 
ing power, elegance, and aestheticism; for intense religiosity — an anodyne 
to worldliness — is a frequent undercurrent, as in this prayer rug. Gloriously 
sumptuous, fit for imperial knees, it is far more than an appurtenance of a 
princely mosque. Vibrant blossoms, stalks, and leaves and visionary colors 
surely stimulated spiritual feelings both in the worshipers who used it and in 



138. 

PRAYER RUG WITH FLOWERING PLANT 
Mughal, ca. 1625 

Silk warp and weft, wool pile, 49 X 35 5 /s in. 
(124.5 X90 cm.) 

Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection, Lugano 



those who designed and knotted it. Although it has been suggested that 
Mughal art and architecture are monuments to the oppressive control by a 
few over many, it could be argued that those who created Mughal works of 
art, such as this rug, gained almost as much from the experience as the 
patrons. Without their elation, this sublime carpet could not have been made. 

May Beattie has suggested that this carpet, once known as the Aynard 
prayer rug, was part of a saf, or prayer rug with multiple niches. 1 Daniel 
Walker has proposed that it represents the imperial level of Lahore work.~ 

1. Beattie, The Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection, pp. 69-72. 

2. Walker, "Classical Indian Rugs," pp. 256-57. 

Published: Migeon, Exposition des arts musulmans, pi. 83; Beattie, The Thyssen- 
Bornemisza Collection, pp. 69-72, pi. ix; The Arts of Islam, pp. 62, 118, no. 100; 
Gans-Ruedin, Indian Carpets, pp. 114-15; The Indian Heritage, p. 76, no. 199. 



139. 

MANUSCRIPT: BUSTAN 

(THE ORCHARD) OF SATJI 

(132 folios, 3 miniatures) 

Scribe: Mir- c Ali al-Husaini, copied for 

Sultan c Abd al- c Aziz 

Mughal, Bukhara, 1540-50 

Fogg Art Museum, Harvard University, 

Cambridge, Massachusetts, Gift of Philip Hofer 

in honor of Stuart Cary Welch (1979.20) 

SA c Dl's VISIT TO AN INDIAN TEMPLE 

Attributed to Bishndas, working over an 
earlier painting by Shaikh-Zada 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: \PA x TA in. (29.9 x 18.4 cm.) 
Miniature: \VA x 6 7 /h in. (28.6 x 17.5 cm.) 



Jahangir, the "World Seizer," was in fact more interested in acquiring 
works of art than additional territories. The most aesthetically discriminat- 
ing member of a dynasty of great patrons, he was also the outstanding 
collector, and his agents searched widely in his behalf, with the thoroughness 
of latter-day art dealers. This copy of Sa c di's Bustan (The Orchard) was one 
of his cherished possessions, inscribed in his own hand with the statement 
that he received the manuscript in 1605. An inscription under the shamsa of 
Akbar on the lower part of the page also indicates that the manuscript came 
to him after the death of his brother Prince Murad and that it was "most of 
the time in my presence and is constantly being read, and the eye enjoys the 
beauty of its incomparably beautiful calligraphy." The manuscript was later 
admired by other emperors, including Shah Jahan. 

Notable for its three superb miniatures and its illuminations, magnificent 
calligraphy, and marvelously varied borders, the manuscript was commis- 
sioned for Sultan c Abd al- c Aziz of Bukhara, who could be considered the 
Jahangir of the Uzbek dynasty. It was illustrated by Shaikh-Zada, a major 
Iranian artist who began his career at Herat working with the great Bihzad 
and later moved to Safavid Tabriz, where he contributed to several of Shah 
Tahmasp's greatest manuscripts and trained several important Safavid masters. 
In about 1530 he moved to Bukhara, the Uzbek capital, probably at the 
invitation of Sultan c Abd al- c Aziz, where he was instrumental in bringing 
about a new artistic synthesis. 

Although Jahangir greatly admired this Bustan, its miniatures did not 
entirely satisfy his taste for psychological depth. In two of them, Dara and 
the Herdsman and Garden Scene, signed by Shaikh-Zada, several faces were 
discreetly repainted in the current Mughal mode, probably by Bishndas. 1 

The third miniature is the only work of art known to us that has been 
improved by extensive repainting, a demonstration of Jahangir's and his art- 
ist Bishndas 's daring conviction and inventiveness. Sacdi's Visit to an Indian 
Temple illustrates Sa c di's witty morality tale in which unprincipled priests 
are revealed to have rigged a lucrative "miracle": an image whose arm could 
be raised — by secretly pulling a cord. All of this was set forth by Shaikh- 
Zada in a splendid "temple," an orientalist fantasy of arabesques, pillars, 
and tiles. These met with imperial enthusiasm, but the figures did not, and 
they were almost entirely translated into Mughal idiom by Jahangir's ad- 
mirable portrait painter Bishndas, who created an affecting assemblage of 
sensitively portrayed priests, devotees, and casual visitors. Shaikh-Zada's 
figures are now buried without a trace beneath those of Bishndas, who dis- 
creetly retouched surrounding areas to assimilate them into the setting. 
Although this brilliant picture is unsigned, our attribution of the repainting 
is supported by comparison with Shaikh Phul in His Hermitage (no. 140). The 
Birth of Jahangir (no. 114) can also be ascribed to him. 

1. For Dara and the Herdsman, see: Martin, The Miniature Painting, vol. 1, fig. 28; for 
the Garden Scene, see: Grube, The Classical Style, pp. 39, 204, pi. 97.2. 

Published: Welch, The Art of Mughal India, pp. 70-71, 165-66, no. 23; Grube, The 
Classical Style, pp. 39, 204, no. 97; Das, "Bishndas," pp. 184-85, fig. 356. 



210 




139 



140 



Much of the appeal of Mughal paintings stems from their all-encompassing 
view of India and its people, as observed through acute eyes and perceived 
by minds at once curious, objective, and poetic. Jahangir, who directed this 
miniature much as Satyajit Ray directed the film Pathcr Panchali, brought to 
bear the same intelligence that sparkles in his Tuzuk. Pertinent "incon- 
sequentials" engaged the emperor's, his artist's, and now our attention: the 
crumbling brick wall beyond the inspired devotee; its mysterious door, lead- 
ing nowhere; the beautifully wrinkled, baffling bits of cloth laid by the shaikh 
at the edge of his platform; the seated figure (the devotee's devotee?) to the 
right of the house-shrine; the trio of shy but enthralled ladies in the distance 
at the left. 

Jahangir was fully aware of his artists' potentials, and of their weaknesses. 
He admired Bishndas for his portraiture, and for his ability to catch dusty 
colors and winding village spaces. From 1613 until 1620, Bishndas, who was 
a nephew of the artist Nanha, served as artist with Jahangir's embassy to the 
court of Shah c Abbas I, where he painted and drew the most penetrating 
portraits ever made of a Safavid ruler. 1 

1. For Bishndas, see: Beach, The Grand Mogul, pp. 107-11. 

Published: Mehta, Studies in Indian Painting, pi. 37; Das, "Bishndas," pp. 186-88, pi. 
18; Das, Mughal Painting, pi. 62; Skelton, "Shaykh Phul," pp. 123-29. 



140. 

SHAIKH PHUL IN HIS HERMITAGE 
By Bishndas 

Inscribed by Jahangir : " a painting of the maj dhub 
[attracted by God] Shaikh Phul, who lives at 
present in the city of Agra, by Bishndas" 
Mughal, ca. 1610 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 14 3 /s X 10 3 /k in. 
(36.5 x 26.5 cm.) 

Bharat Kala Bhavan, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi (5410) 



< 140, detail 



213 




141 



141, detail 



Justifiably, this miniature and Mansur's Peafowl (no. 144) are the most 
renowned of Jahangir's natural history pictures, brought together here for 
the first time since the eighteenth century or earlier. Both reflect the emperor's 
delight in animals and birds, and the effectiveness of his encouragement of 
the two artists he most admired. According to the emperor, Mansur was 
"unique" in the art of "drawing," a word he chose carefully, for Mansur's 
pictures are draftsmanly rather than painterly. Unlike Abu 3 l-Hasan, who 
could paint anything, Mansur was highly specialized, the equivalent in the 
arts of a Thoreau or a Fabre, happiest and most at ease with the world of 
nature. Although he occasionally depicted people, especially as a young man 
during the reign of Akbar, he saw them through eyes attuned to the animal 
and vegetable kingdom rather than to mankind, landscape, or abstract form. 
His most exhilarating pictures — meditations brushed onto paper — grew from 
direct responses to animals, birds, and flowers. By analyzing the pictures, 
one can follow their development from the first faint brushstrokes suggesting 
gesture and proportion to firmer, darker ones defining form and texture. When 
his bird or animal moved, Mansur countered by whiting over his first lines 
and redrawing, an enlivening procedure that increases the effect of motion. 

Mansur stalked birds and animals in the field, where he and his subjects 
were more comfortable and behaved more naturally than in Jahangir's 
zoological gardens; and it was there that he accomplished much of his work, 
adding the finishing touches — resplendent passages of gold or lapis lazuli, 
and landscape backgrounds — in his studio. Whereas Basawan or Abu'l-Hasan 
studied the psychological interplay between people, Mansur analyzed and 
recorded the gestures and expressions of the animal world — the looks of 
squirrels when one has a nut and the other covets it, or a peahen's sudden 
hungry rush when her mate has caught a luscious little snake. 

Mansur's early works, datable to about 1585-90 (see no. 104), offer 
another significant clue to his artistic personality: his gracefully calligraphic 
brushwork, verging in its rhythms on arabesques. Perhaps because arabesques 
are distilled from natural forms and movement, Mansur found them congenial; 
and when he sketched flora and fauna, he often infused them with the recipro- 
cal twists and turns familiar from this appealing mode. It is very marked in 
the springing tails of the squirrels, the essential actors in this picture who 
lend it universal appeal. 

The inscription on the back, "The work of Nadir al- c Asr [Wonder of 
the Age], Nadir az-Zaman [Wonder of the Time]," which gives the titles 
bestowed by Jahangir upon both Mansur and AbuH-Hasan, has caused much 
academic ink to flow on the question of the attribution of the picture. Although 
the inscription probably dates from the eighteenth century, it conforms to 



141. 

SQUIRRELS IN A PLANE TREE 

By Abu'l-Hasan and Mansur 

Inscribed: "the work of Nadir al- c Asr [Wonder 

of the Age], Nadir az-Zaman [Wonder of the 

Time]" 

Mughal, ca. 1610 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: I8V2 X 12 5 /8 in. (47 X 32.2 cm.) 

Miniature: WA X 8% in. (36.2 X 22.5 cm.) 

The British Library, India Office Library and 

Records, London (Johnson Album 1, no. 30) 



the visual evidence. Painterly Abu 5 l-Hasan seems to have worked jointly on 
the picture with his more draftsmanlike and animal-minded older colleague. 
Passages such as the mysterious figure climbing the tree (an artist gathering 
squirrel hairs with which to make brushes?), as well as the tree itself, would 
seem to be his, while the squirrels must be assigned to Mansur. (For Abu 3 l- 
Hasan, see nos. 116, 117; for Mansur, nos. 142-46.) 

Published: Brown, Indian Painting, pi. xv; Wilkinson, Mughal Painting, pi. 9; Welch, 
The Art of Mughal India, pi. 25; Paintings from the Muslim Courts, p. 65, no. 100; 
Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pp. 74, 168, no. 35; Chaitanya, A History of In- 
dian Painting, p. 66, fig. 54; Falk and Archer, Indian Miniatures, pp. 59-60, 369, no. 
34, pi. 4. 



142. 

A NILGAI 
By Mansur 

From the Kevorkian Album 

Inscribed, upper left: "Jahangir Shahi"; lower 

left: "the work of the servant of the court, 

Mansur, the Wonder of the Age" 

Mughal, ca. 1615 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 10 x 15 V 4 in. (25.4 X 38.7 cm.) 

Miniature: 7'/* X 9V 2 in. (18.4 x 24.1 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 

Purchase, Rogers Fund and The Kevorkian 

Foundation Gift (55.121.10.13) 



Mansur's intense gaze, a scientist's and poet's combined with a painter's, 
concentrated on this magnificent animal, probably within the confines of 
Jahangir's deer park. In his fervent interest in animals and birds, the artist 
isolated the nilgai, hinting of the field in which he stands only with a few 
clumps of weed near and far. The palette is seductive: modulated blue-grays 
and whites against a thin pale pink ground, now streaked with khaki (an 
Indian word meaning "dusty") in pigment darkened by time. Mansur's crystal- 
clear image of the calmly appealing animal emerges from an infinitude of 
fine brushstrokes, rarely covering the paper underneath and never failing to 
define bony structure, musculature, or textures. Flexibility of ears, wrin- 
kled at the base; luster of eye; hardness of horn and skull, felt through the 
short hairs covering the bridge of the nose; brushlike bristles of mane; and 
softness of tail — all are faithfully and knowingly conveyed . 

When Mansur's Nilgai was incorporated into its royal album, a superb 
border was prepared. Harmoniously blending arabesques and classical motifs 
as interpreted in Renaissance Europe, its red, violet, white, and blue flowers 
show off the painting to spectacular effect. It is difficult to assign a precise 
date to the border, which is likely to have been commissioned not by Jahangir 
but by Shah Jahan, who particularly admired floral arabesques of this sort, 
which are known from other borders and from textiles and marble carvings. 




143 



Mansur's affinity for nature extended to creatures as small as the butterfly 
threateningly ogled by this chameleon. The picture's plot is evident, and 
characteristically unsentimental. Like most Indians, Mansur understood and 
accepted nature's cruel moments as well as its wisdom and humor. A Chameleon 
exemplifies Mansur's exquisite handling of both pigment and line. The spritely 
lizard's skin is exactingly, tactilely dotted all over with shaded green spots, 
and his spine is saw-toothed from neck to tail with perfect points of color. 
How firmly the chameleon grasps his branch! Surely, Mansur knew no rival 
— not even AbuH-Hasan — as a painter of wildlife. 

Published: The Art of India and Pakistan, p. 160, no. 724, pi. 135; Welch, Indian Drawings, 
frontispiece, p. 46, no. 15. 



143. 

A CHAMELEON 

Inscribed: "Ustad [Master] Mansur" 

Mughal, ca. 1610-15 

Brush and ink with color on paper, 4Vh X 

5-% in, (11 x 13.7 cm.) 

Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Royal Library, 
Windsor Castle (RL. 12081) 



Eyed by his hen, the cock lunges down the page, a delicious tidbit wriggling 
in his beak. Beautiful as they may be, neither bird is temperamentally alluring. 
With terrible sharp beaks and scrawny but powerful "drumsticks," both 
are hungry and unfriendly. The hen's ballerina graces are marred by her 
scratchy claws and a gimlet gaze that would strike terror into a snake. 

Few artists have depicted motion as well as quick-eyed Mansur, whose 
peafowl are a study in kinetics as well as avifauna. The peacock's forward 
rush and the peahen's split-second turn are recorded with lightning speed. 
The unnervingly palpable bone, muscle, and sinew of their legs are acceler- 
ated by smoky grays scumbled over Mansur's corrected underdrawing. 

After sketching directly from life and dashing in suggestions of landscape, 
with rocks and trees angled to enhance yet balance the dynamic forms of the 
birds, the artist took this half-finished work into the studio. With continuing 
delight, he completed the patterns and textures of feathers, and lavished 
gold and lapis lazuli on the peacock's tail and full-throated neck — one of the 
bluest of blues, made iridescent by highlights of vermilion. 

Mansur's flowers in the foreground should be compared to the Western 
Asiatic Tulip (no. 145) and to his floral borders for the self-portrait by Farrukh 
Beg (no. 147), upon which the later floral borders here, for an album of 
Shah Jahan, were based. 

Published: Brown, Indian Painting, pi. xxm; Persian and Mughal Art, p. 184, no. 99; 
Beach, The Grand Mogul, pp. 140-41, no. 47; Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pp. 
90-91, pi. 26. 



144. 

PEAFOWL 
Attributed to Mansur 
Mughal, ca. 1610; border ca. 1645 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 14 3 /k x 9 7 /« in. (36.5 X 25 cm.) 
Miniature: 7 1 /a x 4V 4 in. (19.1 X 10.8 cm. 
The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 




144 



144, detail D> 



145. 

WESTERN ASIATIC TULIP (TULIPA 

MONTANA) 

Inscribed by Mansur 

Mughal, ca. 1620 

Opaque watcrcolor on paper 

Miniature: lO'/t x 6 l A in. (26 x 15.9 cm.) 

Maulana Azad Library, 

Aligarh Muslim University 



After describing the flowers of Kashmir, a province he especially enjoyed 
visiting, Jahangir wrote in his memoirs that "those that Nadiru-1- C asri Ustad 
Mansur has painted are more than one hundred." 1 Unless the emperor in- 
cluded flowers in borders, only three have come to light, studies of an iris 
and of a narcissus in the Imperial Library, Gulistan Palace, Tehran, and the 
present painting. 2 As in the animal and bird studies, Mansur here beamed all 
his perceptive powers toward botanical and entomological life, probing their 
secret wonders in a manner both scientifically faultless and imaginatively 
entrancing. Against a late afternoon lemon sky, a scavenging dragonfly cuts 
the air while, near enough to touch, a frail butterfly, majestic as a galleon 
with all sails set, hovers over the festive tulip. Beneath insects and blossoms, 
an aspiring bud aims skyward, resembling a helium balloon tugging at its 
cord. Flowers and bud, empowered by their sinuously reaching leaves, become 
an emblematic silhouette. Mansur's study has overshot — so magnified and 
lofty that it carries us above the earth. 

However closely we look, the prospect delights. Each fragile petal, ithy- 
phallic stamen, cleanly arcing stalk, and agitated green leaf has been passion- 
ately studied and defined. As in his treatment of the peacock's tail (no. 144), 
with its flashing jewels of gold and lapis lazuli, the tulip contains passages 
of gemlike brilliance. 

1. Jahangir, The Tuzuk, vol. 2, p. 145. 

2. For the Iris, see: Goddard, "Un Album de portraits des princes timurides," pp. 
273-74, fig. 113; the Narcissus is unpublished. 

Published: Mehta, Studies in Indian Painting, pi. 31; Das, Mughal Painting, p. 199, pi. 66. 







145, detail 



146 



While the huntsman futilely shakes his talwar, a lion takes pleasure in his 
meal, just as a family cat might toy with a mouse. Nanha conveys empathy 
as effectively as Basawan, sending a shudder through us in his vision of the 
prey turning the tables on the hunter. Although Nanha magnifies the grace- 
ful lion and shows the man as a squirming, terrified creature, the drama is 
nightmarishly convincing. We even accept the small, seemingly scurrying 
bush in front of the man, and the ghoulish hidden profiles on the horizon. 

Nanha convinces us of his distortions by tweaking our sympathies and 
drawing attention to small, undeniable realities: the pathetic little fist clutching 
a useless scabbard, the lion's cruel fangs and claws, and the ravaged pleading 
of the hunter's expression. Although Nanha painted for Akbar, Jahangir, 
and probably Shah Jahan, he always adjusted his style to the prevailing mode 
without weakening his artistic individuality. One of his earliest pictures, 
from the Divan of Anvari (Fogg Art Museum, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Mass.), contains a cook — with arms as exaggeratedly large as 
this lion — robustly stirring a caldron. 1 Even as early as about 1588, Nanha 
could move us by artful distortions, inciting appetite rather than wincing. 

1. For Nanha's cookery scene, see: Schimmel and Welch, Anvari's Divan, p. 105, pi. 
9, p. 107 (det.). 

Published: Coomaraswamy, "Notes on Mughal Painting: 2," p. 212, fig. 20; Beach, 
The Grand Mogul, pp. 148-49, no. 50. 

Artists' lives are often stranger and more intriguing than those of kings, 
and Farrukh Beg's, as understood from a few documents and a handful of 
paintings, was one of the most varied and puzzling. This recently discov- 
ered picture is inscribed as his work at the age of seventy in 1615. Allowing 
for the adjustment of Hijra dates to our own system, he must have been 
born in 1545, presumably in Iran; and one knows from Abu'l-Fazl's words in 



146. 

PERILS OF THE HUNT 

Signed by Nanha 

Mughal, ca. 1615 

Opaque watercolor on silk 

Folio: 9% X 14 5 /8 in. (24.5 X 37.2 cm.) 

Miniature: 7 3 /s x IIV2 in. (18.7 x 29.2 cm.) 

The Free Library of Philadelphia, Rare Book 

Department (M.36) 



147. 

FOLIO FROM AN IMPERIAL ALBUM 

Mughal, dated a.h. 1024 (1615) 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 15 X 10'/« in. (38.2 X 25.6 cm.) 
Miniature: 7% x SY2 in. (19.4 X 14.1 cm.) 
Private collection 

a. AN OLD SUFI (recto) 

Inscribed, top right: "the work of the Wonder 
of the Age [Nadir al-'Asr] Farrukh Beg in 
his seventieth year inscribed after the 
opening ... in battle in the tenth regnal year 
Hijra 1024 [16151"; inscribed, lower inner 
border, in the hand of Shah Jahan: "Farrukh 
Beg," with seal of Nadaram Pandit 

b. CALLIGRAPHY IN NASTA C LIQ (verso) 
Signed by c Ali; with floral borders, perhaps 
by Mansur; with the seal of Jahangir 




147a 




147b 




Farrukh Beg. Sufis in a Landscape, ca. 1601-4. 
Opaque watercolor on paper. Saltykov-Shtshedrine 
Public Library, Leningrad 



the Akbar-nama that he arrived at Akbar's court in 1585, probably after a 
career that had led from Shiraz to Khorasan. For Akbar he contributed two 
paintings to the Akbar-nama and others to several exceptionally fine literary 
manuscripts. Nevertheless, this Iranian master's style may not have greatly 
appealed to the emperor, who would have urged him to observe the real 
world more closely, and to record it with fewer Iranian flourishes. For this 
reason, as Robert Skelton suggested in 1957, Farrukh Beg gladly accepted an 
invitation to move to the Deccan in the early 1600s to work for Sultan Ibrahim 
c Adil Shah II of Bijapur, who admired many styles of painting, including 
those with Safavid flavor. For Ibrahim, it seems, he painted the astonishing 
Sufis in a Landscape (left), which was influenced by and contributed to the 
extraordinary Bijapuri style. He remained at Bijapur, if Skelton is correct, 
until 1608 or 1609, well after Akbar's death, when he returned to the Mughal 
court, now a great artistic center where he could expect enthusiastic patron- 
age from Jahangir. At last, according to the inscription mentioned above, he 
was granted the recognition he believed he deserved. In company with Abu 3 l- 
Hasan and Mansur — and a favorite imperial elephant — he became one of 
Emperor Jahangir's "Wonders." 

Farrukh Beg's artistic style is the most quirkily personal in Mughal art. 
His characteristic figures are shaikhs (spiritual guides), not their youthful 
counterparts, shahids (beloveds), whom he also painted. Middle-aged or 
older, they are angular and attenuated, leaning precariously forward on 
slippered feet, with inwardly searching faces, unfocusing eyes, aquiline noses, 
and long, artfully coiffured white beards. Their hands are those of an artist: 
sensitive, capable, and unexpectedly strong. Although these mystics are si- 
lently cocooned in their auras, the world about them is noisily vital. Steep 
cliffs rumble upward like clenched hands from the murk, with knuckles 
and joints arranged to cast dramatic, occasionally comical, silhouettes. They 
hark back to Dust-Muhammad's rocks (see no. 85), which also emanated 
from the great Safavid Sufi painter Sultan-Muhammad — except that Farrukh 
Beg's rise from dreams, not nightmares. 

One of the most introspective and profound Mughal miniatures, this 
psychic self-portrait by Farrukh Beg was painted at the Mughal court under 
very strong Bijapuri influence. This is especially apparent in the lyrically 
otherworldly character of the miniature and in the changeant off-black stones, 
which take on a purplish glow like that of Sultan Ibrahim c Adil Shah's tomb 
in a warm, late afternoon light. The subject is a gray-bearded Sufi of approxi- 
mately the artist's age, careworn and pensive, slumped in a chair under a 
fantastic tree. Its leaves grow in unlikely red, green, and yellow cabbage 
shapes, so clustered as to seem an infinity of forests — the illumined thoughts 
of a mystic floating heavenward. Behind the old gentleman, a book and two 
pairs of spectacles hint at his eye-straining occupation, while his hennaed 
dog and cat doze contentedly nearby. In the left foreground, suckling sheep 
and goats poignantly refer to a more active stage of life. On his desk, a 
corpulent and aging cat — an ambulatory supply of hairs for paint brushes 
— stalks a puddle of spilled milk, a metaphor perhaps for Farrukh Beg's 
soon to be spilled life. 

This dramatically inventive, darkly glowing miniature, the only pic- 
ture by Farrukh Beg based on European sources, is in effect an homage to 
Albrecht Durer, partly as reinterpreted by Marten de Vos (1532-1603) in his 
Dolor ( Hollstein 209; facing page) and engraved by Raphael Sadeler I (1560— 
ca. 1630). 1 In all likelihood, Farrukh Beg was familiar not only with the 
Sadeler but also with the Durer engravings that had inspired de Vos: Saint 
Jerome in His Study (Bartsch 60), Melencolia I (Bartsch 74), and Erasmus of 
Rotterdam (Bartsch 107). 2 Although Akbar's and Jahangir's artists frequently 
copied or borrowed elements from the emperor's collections of European 
engravings, Farrukh Beg, like Sadeler and de Vos, has here made the sources 
his own, using them according to his needs as though he were quoting pas- 
sages from his own tradition. The Sufi-like head, the flames of hair, the cap, 
and the hands are based on the Erasmus; the sleeves, cuffs, and swelling folds 
of his robe are adapted from Melencolia I. The angle of the head and the 
sloping shoulders evolve from the Saint Jerome, whom Farrukh Beg con- 
verted from Christian saintliness to Muslim Sufihood and whose slippers he 
borrowed, taking them from their shelf in the engraving and putting them 
on the feet of their transformed owner. With further artistic sleight of hand, 



224 



Farrukh Beg lent additional sweetness to Sadeler's and de Vos's hound — based 
on Diirer's sleeping terrier. The chair, boxes, book, walking stick, basket, 
cup, and bottles he also adapted from Sadeler and de Vos, who had in turn 
reshaped most of them from the Saint Jerome. Perspective lines traveled along 
the same route, from Durer to de Vos to Sadeler to Farrukh Beg. But as the 
picture progressed, he increased its spatial ambiguity and wondrousness by 
burying many of the lines under his infinitely expanding tree, converting 
the saint's sunlit study into an arboretum of the soul. 

Farrukh Beg was always a masterful technician, and in old age there 
was no diminishing of artistic control, as is evident in the lovingly minute 
brushwork of the gilded wicker chair, in the graining of the wooden panels 
of desk and cabinet, and above all in the hypnotically subtle mottled 
painterliness — representing months of meditative industry — of the stones, 
tree, and foliage. These, too, were influenced by Durer, whose work with 
the burin, forming an all-encompassing, unifying pellicle of minute strokes, 
was reinterpreted in color. Close inspection reveals that the goat was painted 
over a highly burnished gold ground, and each hair of the dog was high- 
lighted in an almost invisible golden stroke, a further recollection of Diirer's 
minute handling. 

Farrukh Beg belongs in the company of the world's mystical artists: 
Sultan-Muhammad, Altdorfer, and Hercules Segers. As with them, subject 
matter — the portrait, landscape, or story — provided solid ground from which 
to leap into space. Devotedly, he poured all his creative strength into this 
plangent, melancholically personal picture, perhaps sensing it to be his final 
major production. It is his purest achievement, a summary and culmination 
of his artistic and spiritual growth. Iranian graces, Mughal observation, Diirer's 
minute handling, and Bijapuri coloring and fantasy combine harmoniously 
in this most visionary of Mughal paintings. 

The lengthy inscription, presumably in the artist's hand, not only tells 
us that Farrukh Beg was seventy years old in 1615 but also refers to a 
battle, the name of which is illegible. Since the only major clash of arms 
during Jahangir's tenth regnal year was at Roshangarh, near Khirki (where 
the imperial forces roundly defeated a Deccani alliance that included Farrukh 
Beg's former employer, Sultan Ibrahim c Adil -Shah), the artist's words must 
have increased Jahangir's enjoyment of the miniature, reminding him not only 
of a victory but that he had hired away an enemy's most renowned artist. 

This folio from one of Emperor Jahangir's albums is surrounded by 
borders as exceptional as the miniature. It is surrounded by flowers drawn in 
gold on an indigo ground and is further enriched by lines of verse and by 
floral arabesques. On the verso, superb lines of Nasta c liq calligraphy, signed 
by c Ali, are set within a field scattered with colorful flowers outlined in gold. 
Unlike most such Mughal borders, which are more ornamental than 
naturalistic, this one contains closely observed flowers — none of which is 
repeated— growing believably and organically, with palpable stems, leaves, 
and blossoms. They snap with freshness, gesticulate, dance, reach for the 
sun, and exchange views on botanical life. Evidently a very early — perhaps 
the first — instance of this kind of border, it forcibly brings to mind flowers 
painted by Jahangir's great natural history specialist, Mansur, the Wonder of 
the Age, to whom we also assign the border around the miniature, a tribute 
from one "Wonder" to another. 3 




Marten dc Vos (1532-1603). Dolor (Hollstein 209). 
Engraving. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 
New York, Department of Prints and Photographs, 
Harris Brisbane Dick Fund (44.62.6) 



1. Hollstein's Dutch and Flemish Etchings, Engravings and Woodcuts. Comp. Dieuwke 
de Hoop Schieffer. Amsterdam, 1980, vol. 21. I am grateful to Margaret Erskine for 
calling to my attention Marianne Kuffner's identification of the Sadeler engraving as 
the source on which the miniature is based. 

2. Bartsch, Adam Ritter von. The Illustrated Bartsch. Ed. Walter L. Strauss. New 
York, 1980, vol. 10 (formerly vol. 7, part 1). 

3. The flowers in the borders may be compared to Mansur's Western Asiatic Tulip 
(no. 145) and to strikingly similar flowers in the foreground of his Peafowl (no. 144). 

Published: Sotheby's, London, October 15, 1984, lot 36. 

For the pioneering monograph on this fascinating artist, containing bold speculations, 
many of which have proved to be correct, see: Skelton, "The Mughal Artist Farrokh 
Beg"; the Sufi clement so essential to the appreciation of Farrukh Beg's pictures is 
discussed in depth in Schimmel, Mystical Dimensions of Islam. 



225 




148. 

FOUR PORTRAITS OF COURTIERS 

From the Kevorkian Album 

Inscribed, upper left: "Raj Singh, by Balchand"; 

upper right: " c Inayat Khan, by Daulat"; lower 

left: " c Abd al-Khaliq, by R . . . D . . . M . . . "; 

lower right: "Jamal Khan Qarabul, by 

M . . . ra . . ." (probably Murad) 

Mughal, ca. 1615 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 15V* X 10V« in. (38.7 X 26.4 cm.) 

Miniature: 9 7 /8 x 5Vs in. (25.1 x 13 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 

Purchase, Rogers Fund and The Kevorkian 

Foundation Gift (55.121.10.29) 



Jahangir continued his father's portrait albums, encouraging his artists to 
explore psychology ever further, and to note quirks of appearance and costume 
with fuller detail. The almost invariable isolating green grounds behind early 
Akbari figures slowly gave way to suggestions of landscape and to varia- 
tions of color. As before, the subjects' names were noted, often in Jahangir's 
own hand. 

These small, informative characterizations, usually of courtiers standing 
at attention as though before the emperor, often indicate the sitters' stations 
and activities as well as their temperaments. Jamal Khan Qarabul (lower 
right), for example, not only bears a hunter's name but carries the tool of his 
trade, a matchlock. c Abd al-Khaliq (lower left) looks comfortably, plumply 
reverential, while Raj Singh's (upper left) dignity is touched with pride. 
Holding the emperor's sword in a richly figured bag is c Inayat Khan (upper 
right), whose features suggest those of an obliging aristocratic rabbit, a 
glimmer of the psychic weakness that brought tragic days ahead (see facing 
page for portraits of this courtier shortly before he died). 



226 




149 b 



149. 

TWO PORTRAITS OF TNAYAT KHAN 

a. C INAYAT KHAN DYING 
Probably by Govardhan 
Mughal, 1618 

Brush and ink with color on paper, 3 3 /t X 
5 '/tin. (9.5x13.3 cm.) 

Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Francis Bartlett 
Donation of 1912 and Picture Fund (14.679) 

b. C INAYAT KHAN DYING 
Probably by Govardhan 
Mughal, 1618 

Opaque watcrcolor on paper 
Folio: W/2 X 14 in. (36.8 x 35.6 cm.) 
Miniature: 5 X 6'/t in. (12.7 X 15.9 cm.) 
Curators of the Bodleian Library, Oxford 
(Ms. Ouscley 171b, 4v) 



Jahangir, in his Tuzuk, describes the scene shown in this drawing and painting: 
"On this day news came of the death of c Inayat K[han]. He was one of my 
intimate attendants. As he was addicted to opium, and when he had the 
chance, to drinking as well, by degrees he became maddened with wine. As 
he was weakly built, he took more than he could digest, and was attacked 
by the disease of diarrhoea and in this weak state he two or three times 
fainted. By my order Hakim Rukna applied remedies, but whatever meth- 
ods were resorted to gave no profit. At the same time a strange hunger came 
over him, and although the doctor exerted himself in order that he should 
not eat more than once in twenty-four hours, he could not restrain himself. 
He also would throw himself like a madman on water and fire until he fell 
into a bad state of body. At last, he became dropsical, and exceedingly low 
and weak. Some days before this, he had petitioned that he might go to 
Agra. I ordered him to come into my presence and obtain leave. They put 
him into a palanquin and brought him. He appeared so low and weak that I 
was astonished. 'He was skin drawn over bones' [verse] or rather his bones, 
too, had dissolved. Though painters have striven much in drawing an emaci- 
ated face, yet I have never seen anything like this, or even approaching to it. 
Good God, can a son of man come to such a shape and fashion? 

"As it was a very extraordinary case, I directed painters to take this 
portrait." 1 

Although Jahangir implied that more than one painter took the dying 
man's portrait, both the sketched and painted versions here appear to be by 
the same hand. The drawing, made directly from what remained of life, to 
serve as a guide for the finished painting, was probably not intended for 
presentation to the emperor, whose royal albums contain unfinished paint- 
ings but virtually no drawings. It is more dramatic and immediate, reveal- 
ing c Inayat Khan's pained lassitude, his jaw and mouth sagging, his eyes 
glazed. In the painting, with the artist's connivance, he makes a last effort at 
courtliness. He sits upright, hair tidied, eyes straight ahead, still obedient to 
Jahangir's command. Even the bolsters and pillows are at attention. 

Not for a moment has the artist's intense interest in his subject dimin- 
ished in the painted work, in which coloristic beauty, a marvelous arabesque 
carpet, and glass bottles in niches are effective foils to the pitiable theme. The 
muted palette of whites, off-whites, and dusty tans enriched by bold accents 
of richer colors brings to mind the work of Govardhan, who is noted for his 
profound portraits of ascetics and holy men. Many of them share Tnayat 
Khan's emaciation — reached along another road. 

Other earmarks of Govardhan's manner are also apparent here: his lik- 
ing for boldly scaled arabesques, the precise flow of his wrinkled textiles, 
and his tendency to draw unnaturally thin fingers. 

The drawing and the painting are exhibited together here for the first time. 

1. Jahangir, The Tuzuk, vol. 2, pp. 43-44. 
Published: 

a. Coomaraswamy, Catalogue of the Indian Collections: VI, p. 42, no. 14.679, pi. xxxn; 
Welch, The Art of Mughal India, errata, p. 72, no. 28; Welch, Indian Drawings, p. 47, no. 
16; Beach, The Grand Mogul, pp. 162-63, no. 60; Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, p. 27. 

b. Martin, The Miniature Painting, vol. 2, pi. 200; Binyon and Arnold, Court Painters 
of the Grand Moguls, pi. xxiv; Brown, Indian Painting, pi. L; The Art of India and 
Pakistan, p. 162, no. 733; Paintings from the Muslim Courts, p. 72, no. 125; Welch, 
Imperial Mughal Painting, pp. 84-85, pi. 23; Chaitanya, A History of Indian Painting, p. 
60, fig. 38; In the Image of Man, p. 148, no. 191. 



150. 

ASCRIBE 

Attributed to Bichitr 

Mughal, ca. 1625 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 12'/> X 9'/Hin. (31.9 x 23.1 cm.) 

Miniature: 4Vh X 2 3 A in. (10.5 x 7 cm.) 

The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 

Harvard University Art Museums, 

Cambridge, Massachusetts 



Small Mughal pictures are sometimes memorably forceful. The intense 
characterization of this very old man carries across a room and makes it a fit 
neighbor to the haunting studies of c Inayat Khan (no. 149). Respect, not 
pity or sadness, inspired the portrait of this old calligrapher, probably one 
long associated with the imperial library. 

We seem to hear the scratch of the reed pen on paper as the wiry figure 
intently copies from one folio to another. He hunches forward, shoulders 



228 




and elbows sharpened by age, knotted into a pose held daily for most of a 
long life. His lean face is foreshortened, a challenging but dramatically effec- 
tive angle seldom represented in Mughal painting. The artist confronted it 
brilliantly, noting the furrowed brow, wrinkled cheeks, and piercing pupils, 
lustrously black as the scribe's ink. 

Bichitr is not ordinarily known for intimately moving portraits, but 
rather for impressively formal ones. Here, removed from the court, underly- 
ing compositional geometry and adept handling of textures — as in the stiff 
silk coat with deeply ingrained wrinkles that record the gentle old man's 
arduous work — demonstrate the artist's warmth of feeling toward the sitter. 
Although it is usually unwise to base attributions on lesser details, Bichitr 
can be recognized from his unique way of depicting hands, as here, with an 
inordinately large and flat flap of skin between thumb and forefinger. 

Published: Brown, Indian Painting, pi. xlviii; Sakscna, History o f Shahjahan of Dihli, 
p. 267; Persian and Mughal Art, pp. 194, 213, no. 118; Beach, The Grand Mogul, pp. 
168-69, no. 66; Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pp. 96-97, pi. 29; Das, "Calligraphcrs 
and Painters," p. 97, fig. 287; The Indian Heritage, pp. 44-45, no. 65. 



Smilingly content with life, a sumptuously accoutered princely young 
man sets off at a prance for a day of hawking. A cypress tree arcs gracefully, 
blossoms sparkle: nature heralds his adventures in the field. Muhammad 
c Ali carries us to a world completely different from those of suffering c Inayat 
Khan (no. 149) and the industrious scribe (no. 150), both of which portraits are 
affectingly individualistic. In comparison, the prince is a prettified type rather 
than a particular man. Nevertheless, the picture is superb, ecstatic with ara- 



151. 

A PRINCE HAWKING 

Attributed to Muhammad c Ali 

Mughal, ca. 1625; border ca. 1640 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 14 3 /h X 10'/ 4 in. (36.6 x 26 cm.) 

Miniature: IVi X 6 3 /« in. (19.2 x 16.3 cm.) 

Collection Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, Geneva 



229 



besques, massed foliage, burgeoning flowers, sparkling metalwork, and a 
most ornamental huntsman astride a Nijinsky of a horse. 

Muhammad c Ali the painter remains a mysterious figure, known only 
from a few pictures, one of which — a tinted drawing of a young girl in the 
Binncy collection — is signed "work of Muhammad c Ali Jahangir Shahi." 1 It 
confirms that the painter was in Jahangir's employ, even though the style of 
the painting would seem — like that of this miniature — to be more to the 
taste of Shah Jahan. In any event, both these pictures, A Thoughtful Man (no. 
152) and the Reading Youth with Falcon (Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, 
D.C.), exude the heady bouquet of the Deccan, where Prince Khurram 
(later Shah Jahan) served. 2 Perhaps, in a bountiful moment, he recruited the 
artist as a human offering to placate his distressed father. 

1. Binncy, Indian Miniature Painting, no. 123. 

2. For Reading Youth with Falcon, sec: Ettinghauscn, Paintings of the Sultans, pi. 9. 

Published: Stchoukinc, "Portraits mughols," pp. 202-3, pi. 69, fig. 6, no. xi; Skclton, 
"The Mughal Artist Farrokh Beg," p. 400, fig. 9; Persian and Mughal Art, pp. 178-79, 
no. 92; Welch and Welch, Arts of the Islamic Book, pp. 198-200, no. 65. 



Muhammad c Ali's most memorable picture depicts the spiritually enlightened 
old man. He is surrounded by a superb still life — water bottles, pen box, 
water jar, and book — and backed by ecstatically flowering bushes, his as- 
cending thoughts transformed. Like the court coat (no. 137), this profound 
and compact picture could as well be assigned to the Deccan as to the Mughal 
court. Inasmuch as an attached remnant of floral border indicates that it 
belonged to the Mughal emperor, we place it here rather than among the 
Deccani pictures (nos. 193-95, 197). But the palette of golden buff, pale 



152. 

A THOUGHTFUL MAN 
Inscribed: "the work of Muhammad c Ali" 
Mughal, ca. 1610-15 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 6'/« X 5 7 /s in. (15.5 X 15 cm.) 
Miniature: AVi x 3 7 /x in. (11.4 x 10 cm.) 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Francis Bartlett 
Donation of 1912 and Picture Fund (14.663) 



blue, and purplish blue-gray is as Bijapun in style as the sensitive flare of the 
pensive graybeard's scarf. Evidence of this Deccani connection is supported 
by the very strong influence on Muhammad c Ali of Farrukh Beg, who painted 
for Sultan Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II of Bijapur as well as for Akbar and Jahangir 
and many of whose pictures also reveal affinities with both traditions (see 
no. 147). Inasmuch as Farrukh Beg specialized in portraying wise old gentle- 
men and because the clump of flowers in the lower right corner of this 
picture is painted precisely in his manner, it seems possible not only that the 
felicitous younger painter worked at Bijapur with the older artist but that he 
accompanied him when he returned from the Deccan to Jahangir's court. 

Published: Coomaraswamy, Catalogue o f the Indian Collections: VI, p. 35, no. 14.663, 
pi. xxv; Skelton, "The Mughal Artist Farrokh Beg," p. 339, pi. 8, fig. 17; Barrett 
and Gray, Painting of India, p. 125; Beach, The Grand Mogul, pp. 144-45, no. 48; 
Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pp. 96-97, pi. 20. 



153. Arabesque carpets such as this one offer a little-explored garden paradise 

FRAGMENT OF AN ARABESQUE of floral scrolls, trellises, palmettes, and cloudbands, to mention but a few 

CARPET of j ts dazzling elements. This large, extremely well-preserved section of a 

Mughal, ca. ^25 carpet should be imagined in a Mughal palace over a white marble floor, 

Silk warp and weft, wool pile, , . , i j^ir ^ ■ • l • i 

18 ft 9'/> in x 49'A in where it would have been laid out only tor certain occasions, perhaps special 

(5 73 m x P5 1 cm ) feasts or celebrations. Like European rulers of the early seventeenth century, 

Calouste Gulbenkian Museum, Lisbon (T. 72) the Mughals did not eat in places specifically intended for dining. Rather, 

food was brought to favorite spots, selected according to mood, time of 
day, moon and stars. 

Precise dating of Mughal pictures and objects on stylistic grounds is 
often difficult, and this carpet could as well be from the reign of Shah Jahan 
as from that of his father. But on the basis of its vitally resonant design and 
color with strong Iranian flavor, we associate it with the court of Jahangir 
and Nur-Jahan rather than with the more formal period of Shah Jahan. Who- 
ever the patron, it is magnificent, with the impassioned, almost distracting 
chromaticism that separates it totally from Iranian classicism. 

Published: Perdigao, Calouste Gulbenkian Collectionneur, pi. facing p. 152. 



154. 

SHAH JAHAN ON THE 
PEACOCK THRONE 

Attributed to Govardhan; border attributed to 
the Master of the Borders 
Mughal, ca. 1635; border ca. 1645 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 14V4 X 10 in. (37.5 x 25.4 cm.) 
Miniature: 6V2 X 4 7 /h in. (16.5 x 12.4 cm.) 
The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



Shihab ad-Din Muhammad Shah Jahan (r. 1628-58), the quintessence of 
the "Great Mogul," reigns to this day in the public mind as the embodiment 
of royal grace, grandeur, and power. Two of his creations are as renowned 
as he: the superb white marble tomb known as the Taj Mahal, built for his 
deeply beloved wife, Mumtaz-Mahal (Chosen One of the Palace); and the 
Peacock Throne, which he occupies in this miniature. During his thirty-year 
reign the empire achieved its peak of glory. These were the years of the Pax 
Mogulica, when the government was just but firm and life was secure. Shah 
Jahan's court poets, artists, and sculptors devised emblems for this golden 
age: scales of justice and a mighty lion so disciplined that he relaxes peace- 
fully near an appetizing goat. 

The ultimate aristocrat in his tastes, appearance, and way of life, Shah 
Jahan (Ruler of the World) was sufficiently practical to be coldly ruthless 
when circumstances demanded. As Prince Khurram, he — in typical Mughal 
fashion — plotted ways to power; and just as Jahangir's relationship with his 
father Akbar had turned bitter, so did Khurram's with Jahangir, whose antago- 
nism toward him was encouraged by Nur-Jahan. At his father's death, Prince 
Khurram's followers, led by Asaf Khan, eased him to the throne. Once he 
occupied it, orders were issued to do away with potential rivals, a brother, 
two nephews, and two cousins. 

Hardy, alert, and practical, Shah Jahan also fancied the good life, within 
limits. Although his father died of heart trouble at the age of fifty-eight, 
after years of overenthusiastic indulgence, Shah Jahan reached seventy-four, 



232 



153, detail > 



a considerable age in those days, and one that supports belief in his 
temperateness, despite gossip at the time of his death that it was brought on 
by a surfeit of aphrodisiacs. He lived in an age of moderation, when the 
Mughal ethos continued the move toward orthodoxy in every area — from 
social conduct to religion to art, a trend initiated during the later years of 
Akbar's rule. These changes can be traced in stone by following the develop- 
ment of palaces from Akbar's buoyantly powerful, organically arranged red 
sandstone buildings at Fatehpur-Sikri to Shah Jahan's crystalline halls of 
white marble at Agra or Delhi (Shahjahanabad). 

Painting and social deportment exemplify the same pattern, as can be 
seen by comparing Shah Jahan on the Peacock Throne with Akbar in Old Age 
(no. 113). While the grandfather, whom he greatly admired, seems relaxed 
even in ill health, Shah Jahan exudes decorum. Arranged in pure profile, he 
is pleasantly austere — isolated in his wealth and glory. According to a reli- 
able eighteenth-century Mughal biography of Bebadal Khan Saidai Gilani, a 
poet who also served as the darogha, or superintendent, of the goldsmiths' 
office in the royal establishment, "the jewelled throne — known by name as 
the Peacock Throne — was finished by him in the course of seven years at the 
cost of a kror of rupees, or 333,000 tumans of Persia, or four krorcs of the 
khani coinage of Transoxiana ... so valuable and adorned a throne was never 
seen in any other age." 1 

The Peacock Throne (Takht-i ta 3 us) was commissioned shortly after the 
jewel-loving Shah Jahan's accession and first used on March 12, 1635, at the 
celebration of the New Year, when it was set in a pavilion along the south- 
ern wall of the lower court at Agra. By the end of March in 1648, when Shah 
Jahan moved his court to Delhi, the throne was installed in the diwan-i khas 
(hall of private audience) of the Red Fort. One of the major symbols of 
Mughal wealth, might, and artistry, it was occupied by Aurangzeb, Shah 
Jahan's most effective and at times ruthless son and successor, as well as by 
later emperors. When it was carried off to Iran in 1739 by Nadir Shah, the 
Mughal empire lost far more than a superb treasure of jewels and gold. It 
was replaced by a sad pastiche replica worthy of the operatic stage — a poi- 
gnant reminder of vanished power, sat upon by a puppet king. In Iran, it 
became a convenient mine for diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and gold, some 
of which were incorporated into the thrones of Fath c Ali Shah of the Qajar 
dynasty and of his successors. By now, only the legend remains. 

Shah Jahan on the Peacock Throne must have been painted soon after 
the completion of the throne. It not only depicts the king in all his glory, 
and his new creation, but it also contains studies of the once hoarded 
gems that were set into the gold masterpiece to impress and delight spec- 
tators. Govardhan, to whom the picture can be attributed by comparison 
with signed works, set actual precious stones and pearls into Shah Jahan's 
rings, necklace, and earring to make the portrait all the more lavish. The 
border, a schematized garden planted with flowers and aflutter with pleasing 
birds, can be attributed to the Master of the Borders, a mysterious painter 
and designer whose career seems to have begun in the Deccan (sec nos. 
151, 161). 2 

Although several late copies of the picture have survived, this is the 
original. 3 



1. Shah Nawaz Khan, The Maathir-ul-umara, vol. 1, pp. 396-97. 

2. For further work by the Master of the Borders, see: Welch and Welch, Arts of the 
Islamic Book, nos. 56, 57, 62, 65, 72, 73. 

3. For early nineteenth-century copies of this painting in the Victoria and Albert 
Museum, London, and in The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, see: Clarke, 
Indian Drawings, pi. 10; Hambly, Cities o f Mughal India, pi. 48. Both are finely worked 
but the figure drawing is soft and boneless. The painting Timur Hands His Imperial 
Crown to Babur, from the Minto Album (Victoria and Albert Museum, London), 
attributed to Govardhan in Shah Jahan's own hand, is especially valuable in making 
the attribution. See: Welch, Indian Drawings, p. 48. 

Published: Brown, Indian Painting, p. 90, pi. xxv; Persian and Mughal Art, pp. 181, 
208, no. 95; The Indian Heritage, p. 43, no. 57. 



155. 

ROSETTE (SHAMSA) BEARING THE 
NAME AND TITLES OF EMPEROR SHAH 
JAHAN 

Opening page from the Kevorkian Album 
Inscribed: "His Majesty, Shihab ad-Din 
Muhammad Shah Jahan, the King, Warrior of 
the Faith, may God perpetuate his kingdom 
and sovereignty!" 
Mughal, ca. 1645 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 15 3 /k X IOV2 in. 
(39.1 x 26.7 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
Purchase, Rogers Fund and The Kevorkian 
Foundation Gift (55.121.10.39) 



As patron, Shah Jahan is best known for his great buildings, especially the 
Taj Mahal and the mosques and palace and fort complexes of Agra, Lahore, 
and Delhi. But he was also a highly discerning patron of jewelers, jade 
craftsmen, metalworkers, and textile makers, as well as of painters and calligra- 
phers. Too often, paintings made under his guidance are dated to his father's 
reign; and he is insufficiently credited with innovative marvels such as the 
present shamsa (little sun) from one of his albums. The illuminator, whose 
name is unknown, lavished many months of devotion on it, losing himself 
in a myriad of rosettes, garlands, and swooping birds, which should be 
viewed from several angles to appreciate the varied work of the gold. It is a 
superb painting, to be ranked with the finest Mughal figural miniatures, and 
to be compared with other masterpieces of arabesque design, such as the 
floor spread (no. 136) and the carpet (no. 153). 

Although many Iranian prototypes for this rosette could be cited, they 
differ strikingly in spirit. Shah Jahan's illuminator envisioned the sunburst 
not flat, as in Iranian prototypes, but with characteristically Mughal three- 
dimensionality; and his coloring is tropically warm as opposed to the cool 
blues and golds of the Iranian mode, which seem in comparison classically 
restrained. Shah Jahan's shamsa is romantic, even passionate, radiating sun- 
light and expressive of the emotional undercurrents at his court and in his 
temperament. 

The Kevorkian Album contains a second, very similar rosette, bearing 
the titles of Emperor Aurangzeb. Two other rosettes, uninscribed but appar- 
ently by the same patient, highly disciplined but visionary artist, are in the 
Windsor Castle Padshah-nama, and a third was formerly in the Rothschild 
collection. 1 

1. The second Kevorkian example will be reproduced in the full study of the Kevorkian 
Album now in preparation. The shamsas in the Windsor Castle Padshah-nama have 
not been published. For the Rothschild shamsa, see: Beach, The Grand Mogul, cover. 

Published: Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pp. 98-99, pi. 30; The Indian Heritage, 
p. 44, no. 66. 



156. 

SILK HANGING 

Mughal, perhaps Gujarat, ca. 1625-30 
Silk, 6 ft. 11 in. x 3SVa in. (2.12 m. X 97 cm.) 
Staatliche Museen Preussischer Kulturbesitz, 
Museum fur Indische Kunst, West Berlin 
(MIK.I.364) 



If Shah Jahan crossed the time barrier and revisited his palaces, he would 
probably deplore them as starkly barren shells. The proportions and details 
of carving would please him, but he would be shocked by the condition of 
many pietra dura inlays — picked out by generations of looters and tourists 
— and by the absence of dazzling gold and silver adornments. He would also 
miss the stunningly colorful textiles, virtual flower gardens once stretched 
on the floors, hung in doorways and windows, and worn by throngs of 
courtiers and attendants — more than an intimation of which is provided 
here by a miraculously preserved imperial tent (no. 165). Designers devised 
ever richer and more inventive variations usually on botanical themes, and 
weavers on imperial looms were constantly busy. Agents as a matter of 
course acquired the finest work, usually on commission, from textile cen- 
ters all over India and beyond; and visiting dignitaries brought bolts of 
superb cloth along with peerless elephants and horses, splendid objects, and 
other royal gifts, which were punctiliously inspected, admired — and, often 
as not, recycled in the rounds of imperial benevolence. 

Shah Jahan's miniatures in the Windsor Castle Padshah-nama, the official 
illustrated history of his reign (see no. 162), offer vivid glimpses of the 
splendors of court life as it was lived, replete with exquisitely detailed 
renderings ot all the vanished glories. From the miniatures, it is apparent 
that silk hangings such as this one hung in doorways or windows to provide 
shade or privacy. Even now, in the forts of Agra and Delhi, one sees small 
hooks and stone fastenings for setting the acres of festive hangings that 
made Shah Jahan's white palaces resemble paradisiacal vessels in full sail. 

Often, as here, designers "improved" nature, borrowing leaves and 
blossoms from flowers of the mind rather than the garden. Carolyn Kane 
has pointed out that the central hybrid might be based upon the tobacco 
plant, introduced to India during the late Akbar period, but that the spandrels 



236 




155 



are filled with three distinct varieties of leaves and buds. 1 Very similar tex- 
tiles are in the Calico Museum, Ahmedabad; the Government Museum, 
Karachi; and private collections. 

1. Personal communication, November 1984. 

Published: Katalog 1971: Ausgestellte Werke, no. 150, pi. 25; The Arts of Islam, no. 93. 




156 



157 



This gathering, shown in a cool, fragrant garden as dusk approaches, per- 
fectly exemplifies the civilized pleasures of princely Mughal life. The royal 
host, perhaps a reminiscence of Jahangir as Prince Salim, enjoys a mushaira, 
or poetry reading, enhanced by music and good things to eat and drink. 
Bichitr, the Mughal Van Dyke, who portrayed every eminent personage 
during the reigns of Jahangir and Shah Jahan, has itemized each paintable 
delight: the wise and witty company; their elegantly decorous attendants; a 
superb dhurrie, beneath yet more marvelous carpets with arabesque designs, 
one of them entirely in whites; a black pedestal table, apparently of Mughal 
workmanship; gold, jade, and glass utensils; and — in the event that all this 
begins to pall — an invitingly placed charpoi (cot) beneath a canopy at 
the end of the garden. 

Bichitr's brilliance of technique is apparent everywhere, especially in 
the trompe l'oeil handling of still life, a European approach to painting usu- 
ally avoided by other Mughal artists. The guard dressed in white, left 
foreground, wears a quilted collar far wider than those worn prior to the 
reign of Shah Jahan. The drawing of his hand, with sinuous, tapering fingers, 
is one of many convenient earmarks of Bichitr's artistic personality. More 
fundamental, however, is the geometric substructure of his compositions, as 
here and in the unusually intimate depiction of an old scribe (no. 150). 

Published: Arnold, The Library of A. Chester Beatty, vol. 1, p. 29, vol. 3, no. 7, pi. 58; 
Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pp. 110-11, pi. 36; James, Islamic Masterpieces of the 
Chester Beatty Library, p. 41, no. 51e; The Indian Heritage, pp. 40-41, no. 49. 



157. 

A YOUNG PRINCE WITH SAGES IN A 
GARDEN 

From the Minto Album 

Inscribed: "the work of Bichitr" 

Mughal, ca. 1630 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 15 x 10% in. (38 x 27 cm.) 

Miniature: 11 X 8 in. (28 X 20.2 cm.) 

Chester Beatty Library, Dublin (Ms. 7, no. ' 



158. 

MANUSCRIPT: GULISTAN 
(THE ROSE GARDEN) OF SA C DI 
(114 folios, 6 miniatures) 

Scribe: Sultan c Ali ibn Muhammad al-Mashhadi 
Herat, dated a.h. 873 (1468) 
Private collection 

a. SA C DI MEETS A FRIEND IN A GARDEN 
By Govardhan; signed in lower margin 1 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 5'/« X 2¥h in. 
(12.9x6.7 cm.) 

b. A PROPHET TEACHES SEVEN DISCIPLES 
Attributed to c Abid 2 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 4-Vh x 3Vi in. 
(11.2x9 cm.) 

C. AN ARGUMENT COMES TO BLOWS 
By Payag; signed on coat of older man 3 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 3% X 2% in. 
(9.8x6.6 cm.) 

d. A PRINCE WHILE RIDING COMES UPON A 
MAN RESTING UNDER A TREE 
By Balchand; signed beneath the horse 4 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 4'/s x 2-Yi in. 
(10.5x6.7 cm.) 

C. A REVERED OLD MAN IS DISCOVERED 
IN A DRUNKEN STATE 
By Lalchand; signed in lower left corner 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 3 5 /« X 2% in. 
(9.3X6.6 cm.) 

f. A WARRIOR FRIGHTENED BY TRIBESMEN 

By Murad; signed in lower left corner 
Opaque watercolor on paper, x 2% in. 
(9.5x6.6 cm.) 



According to inscriptions, this manuscript was given by Emperor Akbar 
to one Mu'min Khan. It also bears the name of Jahangir, presumably as 
owner, from whom it would have passed to Shah Jahan. Shah Jahan's eighth 
regnal year (1636) is noted, as are the names of Prince Dara-Shikoh and 
Princess Jahanara. 

Like his predecessors, Shah Jahan enjoyed reading especially rich, pocket- 
sized copies of literary classics. This superb fifteenth-century manuscript, 
copied by an illustrious scribe in 1468, contains six small miniatures that are 
painted over damaged Timurid pictures, discernible from the backs of the 
folios. 

In all likelihood, the repainting followed a terrible episode in the palace 
at Agra in the summer of 1644: Legend has it that one evening the manuscript 
was being read by Princess Jahanara, who had served as first lady at Shah 
Jahan's court since 1631, the year that her mother, Mumtaz-Mahal, died while 
bearing her fourteenth child. The princess's dress brushed against a candle 
flame and ignited. Attendants scurried to help, and two ladies-in-waiting 
threw themselves onto the blaze, saving their mistress's life but dying from 
their burns. For four months the princess lay on the verge of death, during 
which time Shah Jahan spent hours each day attending her and praying for 
her recovery. In late November her return to health was celebrated at court, 
with honors and exchanges of gifts. 

On this occasion, presumably, the manuscript became sopped with water, 
and its borders and miniatures were disturbingly stained. In the aftermath of 
the dousing, Shah Jahan commissioned his artists to treat the manuscript 
with as much care as his physicians had treated the princess. Stylistically, the 
pictures by his court artists, most of whom also contributed to the Windsor 
Castle Padshah-nama, can be dated to the mid-164()s, just the time of the fire 
in the harem. Each represents its painter at his most intimate and his best, 
moved to outdo himself at a time of imperial tragedy. 

1. The style and handling are wholly characteristic of this master; see also nos. 149, 
154, 159, 160. 

2. The smoothly rounded, inwardly smiling, parchment-hued faces in this minia- 
ture are unmistakably those of c Abid. A scarcely legible inscription, however, gives 
the name Aqa-Riza Jahangiri, perhaps as master of c Abid. This miniature has suffered 
more than the others, and appears to have been retouched after 1645. 

3. For this romantically inclined painter, see: Welch, A Flower from Every Meadow, 
pp. 110-12, no. 66; Beach, The Grand Mogul, pp. 151-54. 

4. For this artist, see: Welch, A Flower from Every Meadow, pp. 108-9, no. 65; Beach, The 
Grand Mogul, pp. 95-100. 

Published: Paintings from the Muslim Courts, p. 82, no. 148. 

I would like to thank Robert Skelton, with whom I examined this manuscript many 
years ago, at which time I observed that the miniatures were painted over Timurid 
pictures. I am also grateful to B. W. Robinson, whose identifications of the subjects 
of the miniatures I have followed. 



159. 

A RUSTIC CONCERT 

Inscribed: "the work of Govardhan" 

Mughal, ca. 1630 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 15 x 10% in. (38 X 27 cm.) 

Miniature: 9 x 6 5 /« in. (23 x 16.7 cm.) 

Chester Beatty Library, Dublin (Ms. 7, no. 11) 



Much of the appeal of Mughal painting stems from its sympathetic and 
accurate documentation of Indian life. Govardhan, whose artistic career 
spanned three reigns, from Akbar's well into Shah Jahan's, recorded rural 
and ascetic genre with a degree of curiosity and sympathy unequaled until 
the early nineteenth century, when William Fraser's artists explored similar 
marvels (see nos. 49, 50). 

With his favorite palette of whites and dusty grays, Govardhan cele- 
brated some of the pleasures of the road, perhaps in the course of a royal 
cavalcade to Kashmir. In the foreground, observed by the artist as though he 
sat with his patron on a platform in an improvised garden enclosed by a 
rustic fence, a Gorakhpanthi yogi and an attendant (the royal valet?) with a 
pet bird listen to a singer accompanied by a rababi. Beyond, servants set up 
the royal tents, one of which is red, signifying the presence of a Mughal 
prince; and on the horizon elephants are tended following the day's march. 

This nostalgic miniature presumably was painted for Shah Jahan's 



242 




eldest son, Crown Prince Dara-Shikoh, who shared his great-grandfather 
Akbar's ambition to bring together Muslim and Hindu religious tenets, espe- 
cially on the mystical level. Although Prince Dara-Shikoh's religious tolerance 
was increasingly at odds with Mughal orthodoxy— and ultimately provided 
compelling arguments for his execution— he spent many years exchanging 
ideas with Hindu as well as Muslim devotees. Several of Govardhan's more 
profound portrait groups record members of his religious circle, who often 
gathered in his beloved Kashmir. It is not farfetched^ to assume that Prince 
Dara-Shikoh also commissioned them. Govardhan must have been available 
to him through the generosity of his admiring father, who encouraged in 
him characteristics he had admired in his beloved grandfather Akbar (See 
also nos. 149, 154, 158, 160.) 

Published: Arnold, The Library of A. Chester Beatty, vol. 1, p. 30, no. 11 frontispiece 
to vol. 3; Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pp. 94-95, pi. 28; James, Islamic Masterpiece* 
of the Chester Beatty Library, p. 39, fig. 51b; The Indian Heritage, p 19 no 47 



243 



Govardhan has assembled four distinct human types. The gray-bearded 
astrologer, astrolabe in hand, who sits quietly in his hermitage, represents 
the intellectual. He is attended by three reverential followers: the loyal assistant, 
happy to serve, who slowly turns the crisp pages of a manuscript; the dedi- 
cated man of nature, scantily dressed, close to the sun and the earth; and the 
spiritual ecstatic, his face wrinkled with fervor. The painting is characteristic 
of Govardhan, and seems to have been painted for Prince Dara-Shikoh in 
Kashmir, probably in one of the shaded groves along watercourses near Dal 
Lake in Srinagar. 

Spurred on by Prince Dara-Shikoh, Govardhan in his later series of 
pictures of ascetics furthered Mughal psychological portraiture in the steps 
of Basawan and Daulat, whose work he seems to have studied. Although he 
also painted imperial grandeur (see no. 154), and his gaunt sitters were not all 
saints (see no. 149 ), his studies of Hindu and Muslim holy men arc among 




160 



244 



the highest achievements of Indian painting. In these spiritual evocations, he 
eschewed rich gold, lapis lazuli, and malachite, limiting his palette to vary- 
ing tones of smoke, seeming to load his brushes from the ashes that were the 
sole raiment of many Hindu devotees. He also avoided sensuous glitter and 
luster, applying the pigments to produce more of a matte surface than in his 
imperial subjects, and scarcely touching them with the needle or burnishing 
stone. 

Govardhan's work is best recognized from its spirit, but certain habits 
of mind and hand also provide useful clues to his artistic personality. In 
addition to his preference for a subdued palette of dust colors and gold and 
his predilection for unusually lean fingers, his treatment of the nude human 
form is innovative in Mughal painting. Most of all, we esteem his painterliness, 
especially in the layered network of whites and off-whites boldly brushed 
on in thin washes and in lyrically sinuous runs, often in the wrinkles and 
folds of clothing. Related to them is a recurring organic pattern fundamental 
to his overall compositions but also found in textiles and other ornamental 
passages, in foliage, and in clouds. Its liquid forms resemble marbleizing 
and bring to mind the cosmically charged motifs of wind, water, and vegeta- 
ble life known from Gujarati stone reliefs. 

Published: Hotel Drouot, Paris, November 23, 1960, lot 63; Arts de I'Islam, p. 227, 
no. 357; L'lslam dans les collections nationales, pp. 288-90, no. 693. 



This dialogue between a fragile, ladylike iris and a loomingly regal tulip, 
attended by an embarrassed little tulipa montana, far transcends botany. The 
artist has so elevated and humanized these flowers that we approach them as 
we should Shah Jahan himself, his very distinguished lady friend, and an 
estimable servant, who averts his glance and seems not to know quite what 
to do with his foliage. The poetic and amusing encounter is set out of doors 
against a golden sky — in fact the bare paper — with a scrub of trees stretch- 
ing across a far horizon. 

We attribute this miniature to an anonymous artist dubbed the Master 
of the Borders because all of the other works assignable to him are borders 
for calligraphies or for miniatures, such as the one surrounding Shahjahan 
on the Peacock Throne (no. 154). Like this bewitching convocation of three 
flowers, the borders were painted in a highly personal idiom, usually sug- 
gesting more than meets the eye. The border framing Shah Jahan on his 
throne implies a formal garden through which he, or the viewer, might 
stroll to inspect its flowers and birds, all painted in potent colors — note the 
strange acid greens and reds startlingly juxtaposed with orange — that sing 
out in higher tones than those of other Mughal artists. 

Whatever his name or history, this cheerful painter is easily distin- 
guished through his delicate but notable grace notes in Shah Jahan's albums 
and from designs supplied to decorate the walls of palace apartments. He 
stands out as a lyrical poet among masters of prose. 

His career seems to have begun in the Deccan, where his talents were 
recognized by Akbar's — and later Jahangir's — enlightened courtier, the 
statesman-soldier-poet-patron c Abd ar-Rahim, the Rhankhanan (Lord of 
Lords; 1556-1627), for whom he created many fantastically inventive borders. 
(For a portrait of the Khankhanan, see no. 118, where he is shown standing 
directly in back of Prince Khurram.) These borders, which can be dated to 
about 1615-20, and even more extraordinary ones for the Khankhanan's now 
dispersed manuscript of Jami's Subhat al-Abrar (The Rosary of the Righteous) , 
are the most imaginatively poetic works by this peculiarly gifted artist, whose 
ornamental fantasies would appeal to Japanese taste. 1 

Further light on the career of the Master of the Borders is shed by a 
series of smaller, simpler borders for a dispersed copy of the Fawa'id-i Qutb- 
Shahi (The Benefits of Qutb-Shah), copied for Sultan 'Abdullah Qutb-Shah 
of Golconda in 1629-30. 2 Revealing slight traces of Mughal naturalism in 
their bird painting, they can be assigned to him and to his workshop before 
he joined the staff of Shah Jahan, who as prince spent many years in the 



161. 

TULIPS AND AN IRIS 

Attributed to the Master of the Borders 

Mughal, mid-17th century 

Opaque watcrcolor on paper 

Folio: \2% X 8 in. (32 X 20.2 cm.) 

Miniature: 10 3 /« X 6% in. (26.4 X 16.1 cm.) 

Collection Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, Geneva 



245 



Deccan, where he probably met the Master of the Borders through the 
connoisseurly courtier. 3 

1. See Arnold and Grohmann, The Islamic Book, pis. 84-87. For the Subhat al-Abrar, 
some pages of which contain small studies of birds and animals, see: Hassan, Moslem 
Art, vol. 1, pis. 16, 17. Other folios are in the collections of Mr. and Mrs. Ralph 
Benkaim and The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 

2. Seven folios of the Fawa'id-i Qutb-Shahi are in the collection of Edwin Binney, 
3rd. See: Binney, Indian Miniature Painting, p. 149, no. 125. For the manuscript, see: 
Bukhari, "An Unpublished Illuminated Manuscript," pp. 8-11. 

3. Other borders by this artist are illustrated in Welch and Welch, Arts of the Islamic 
Book, pp. 198-200, no. 65, pp. 220-23, no. 73. 

Published: Welch and Welch, Arts of the Islamic Book, pp. 217-20, no. 72. 



Like Akbar and Jahangir, Shah Jahan commissioned a great illustrated 
manuscript documenting the history of his life and reign; and like those 
made for his progenitors, his has come down to us less than intact. The 
largest portion, containing forty-four pictures, was bound and cased at 
Lucknow in the late eighteenth century, and has been in the Royal Library at 
Windsor Castle for over a century. Before it was bound, several miniatures 
went astray, among them the two here, which were adorned with Lucknow 
borders. Both illustrate episodes late in the reign. 

Shah Jahan's notion of subjects appropriate to an official history dif- 
fered from his father's. Jahangir's appreciation of the quirky and trivial led 
him to commission pictures of, for example, interviews with holy men and 
his discovery of a confrontation between a snake and a spider, whereas his 
more formal son concentrated on state occasions, battles, and family cele- 
brations, which his artists painted with almost compulsive, hence delight- 
fully informative, attention to detail. 

Sprawling, rich, and managed by an increasingly complex officialdom, 
the Mughal empire now moved at the stately pace of an aged tortoise. Whereas 
Akbar took off at a moment's notice at the head of a vigorous army, Shah 
Jahan's military establishment required months to get under way; and all too 
often, the results were less than triumphant. The motivation had changed, 
too. Akbar's active expansionism had been replaced by quiescence, occasion- 
ally interrupted by massive attacks upon places such as Kandahar, in Afghan- 
istan, the possession of which had long been contested with Iran; by the 
pursuit of traitors to the empire; or by rodomontade campaigns against the 
rival sultans of the Deccan, whose lands had been coveted by the Mughals 
since the sixteenth century. 

Shah Jahan also felt romantic territorial longings for Samarkand, capital 
of his ancestor Timur. They were sparked to life by outbreaks in Transoxiana, 
which justified a series of campaigns led by a succession of princes. The 
first to go was Murad Bakhsh, who at twenty-two led fifty thousand men 
into Badakhshan. But the climate was disagreeable and the going arduous. 
The prince begged permission to return to India without reaching Samarkand. 
Shah Jahan ordered him to persevere. Murad rebelled, and returned alone to 
Lahore — for which he received a stern paternal reprimand, was denied ac- 
cess to the court, and was replaced by his energetic brother, Aurangzeb. 

For the Padshah-nama, however, a rosier episode was chosen, the triumph 
of Qulij Khan Turani, the devoted follower of the emperor, whose army 
boasted an elite corps of one thousand Uzbeks, all wearing heron plumes. 
Noted for piety and fasting, they were equally renowned for gambling and 
whoring. In the miniature, Qulij Khan accepts the keys of a conquered city, 
probably Bust, which was captured in the eleventh year of the reign from 
Mihrab Khan, one of the Iranian shah's abler generals. In the foreground, 
the Mughal general accepts his enemy's submission, while the background 
itemizes incidents of the siege: mines exploding the fort's outer walls, and 
the breach of the inner ones; Mughal forces invading the city; and the cap- 
ture of Mihrab Khan, who had sought refuge in the citadel. All of this is set 
forth with verve and sunlit clarity by Murad, who inscribed another of his 
pictures for the project {Jahangir Receiving Shah Jahan, Windsor Padshah-nama, 



162. 

TWO FOLIOS FROM A MANUSCRIPT 
OF THE PADSHAH-NAMA 
(HISTORY OF THE EMPEROR) 
OF <ABD AL-HAMID LAHORI 

a. QULIJ KHAN ACCEPTS THE KEYS TO A 
CITY IN BADAKHSHAN 
Attributed to Murad 

Mughal, ca. 1646 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 18% x 12-Vh in. (48 x 31.5 cm.) 

Miniature: 13¥* X 9Vi in. (34 X 24.2 cm.) 

Musec Guimet, Paris 

b. THE SIEGE OF KANDAHAR 
Attributed to Payag 
Mughal, mid-17th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Miniature: \3Vi x 9% in. (34.3 x 23.9 cm. 
The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



247 




162a 



folio 193v) as by "Nadir az-Zaman's pupil, Murad." The Guimet miniature 
is easily attributed by comparison with his signed Siege of Daulatabad, folio 
143r of the Windsor manuscript. 

If Murad's siege raised the spirits of his imperial patron, Payag's view 
of an episode in 1649, during the unsuccessful attempts to recapture strate- 
gic Kandahar must have lowered them. Although Murad was noted for his 
cheerful portrayals of grand events at court — and, we suspect, as a designer 
of architectural ornament, which he painted so inventively — Payag is ad- 
mired for portraits of holy men and ravaged old soldiers, and for views of 
war in all its horror. 



248 



Bleached skeletons, unsettling relics from a previous Mughal misadventure, 
occupy the center of this battle scene, set in a visionary, Altdorfer-like landscape 
of Badakhshan. Payag offers other mettlesome vignettes: a toothy drummer 
pounding the kettledrum with sticks; bright-eyed elephants proud in their 
war paint; and rank upon rank of portraitlikc foot soldiers, ever diminishing 
as they clamber up the hill through puffs of smoke toward glory, or death. 

Published: 

a. Blochct, Collection Jean Pozzi, p. 34, no. 21, pi. xxxix; Soustiel, Paris, 1970, sale 
cat., Catalogue de la collection Jean Pozzi: miniatures indiennes et orientates, lot 76; Arts de 
I'Islam, p. 226, no. 358; Rarities of the Musee Guimet, no. 69; L'Islam dans les collections 
nationales, p. 196, no. 435. 

b. Blochet, Collection Jean Pozzi, pi. xxxv; Welch, A Flower from Every Meadow, 
pp. 110-12, no. 66; Beach, The Grand Mogul, pp. 81-84, no. 25; Welch, Imperial 
Mughal Painting, p. 105, pi. 33. 




162b 



249 




163, detail 



163. 

LENGTH OF FLOWERED SILK 
Mughal, mid-17th century 
Silk and metal-wrapped yarns, 27 'A x 29V2 in. 
(69.2 X74.9 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
The Nasli Heeramaneck Collection, Gift of 
Alice Heeramaneck (1982.477) 



A thoughtfully philosophical designer devised this symbolic pattern ot 
boldly masculine curving stems enlaced by gracefully ladylike smaller 
flowers and culminating in blossoms with flamelike petals. Whether it was 
intended to cover a puffy bolster, a prestigious courtier, or the emperor 
himself, this length of fabric increased the artistic glory of court lite. Its 
forcefulness was perhaps influenced by Ottoman textiles, reminding us that 
the Mughal imperial style not only equaled or surpassed other royal modes 
but was part of a widespread international artistic complex that included the 
Ottomans, the Safavids, and the Deccani sultanates. 1 

1. For a related textile, shown in a miniature, appropriately covering a bolster tor 
royal lovers on a terrace, see: Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pi. 35. 



164. 
JALI 

Mughal, Agra, ca. 1630-35 

Marble with hardstone inlay, 57 x 43% in. 

(144.8 x 110.8 cm.) 

The Kronos Collections, New York 



This superb marble jali, with hardstone inlays in its borders, probably once 
enriched the mood of Shah Jahan's private apartments in Agra Fort. It may 
have preceded, or even inspired, the almost identical twenty-four panels 
forming a screen around the cenotaphs in the famed Taj Mahal tomb complex. 
Mumtaz-Mahal's death in 1631 at Burhanpur in the Deccan while bearing 
her fourteenth child brought terrible sadness to Shah Jahan, who returned to 
Agra in June 1632 and at once initiated the project of her great tomb, which 
was also to be his own. Although the emperor spent approximately half ot 
his thirty-year reign away from his capitals, he was in Agra from June 1632 
until January 1634, and much of his time must there have been spent plan- 
ning the tomb in detail. Conceivably, the Kronos jali was made at that time, 
as a promising substitute for the jeweled gold railing originally intended to 
surround Mumtaz-Mahars cenotaph. Curiously, by 1648, the year of the 
tomb's completion, Shah Jahan had decided to move his capital from Agra 
to Delhi, a decision believed by some to mark the beginning of imperial 
decline. 

Shah Jahan's serious illness in 1657 led to rumors of his imminent death, 
which precipitated the wars of succession, one of the more agonizing epi- 
sodes in Mughal history. On his sickbed, Shah Jahan appointed Prince Dara- 



250 



Shikoh his heir, and this was followed by a scramble for power on the part 
of his four sons. Aurangzeb proved to be the hardiest — and most ruthless 
— and he defeated the others in a series of pitched battles, intrigues, and 
killings. In June 1658 he besieged Agra Fort, where his father, who had now 
recovered his health, was protecting the imperial treasure. By blocking ac- 
cess to the water of the Jamuna River, Aurangzeb forced him to capitulate. 
Imprisoned thereafter by Prince Aurangzeb, Shah Jahan was to spend the 
last years of his life (from June 1658 until February 1666) within Agra Fort, 
where this screen imparted both beauty and sad associations. 

Jalis were characteristically Indian architectural elements, ornamental as 
well as useful, enheartening designers and stonecutters to conjure up ever 
fresh ideas, guided by imperial aesthetes. The boldly geometric jali (no. 120) 
marks Jahangir's taste in about 1610. Now we hurtle forward, omitting 
several stages of the development, to the 1630s, when vegetal forms once 
treated with classical strictness break out in almost rococo florescence. Flowers 
and leaves twist, turn, and undulate in a virtuosic stone lace of writhing 
intensity, a tree of life become orchidaceous. 

Denaturalized flowers, stems, buds, and leaves are arranged in repeated 
arabesques, conveying essences of growth and calling to mind earthier cous- 
ins — the folkloristic bangles that combine vegetal and serpent forms in a 
romp of fertility (no. 69). But the decorative vitality of the imperial screen 
brings to mind other, very disparate traditions: the swagging vegetation of 
Gandharan and Mauryan art, Caesar Augustus's Ara Pacis, and Enea Vico's 
engravings of acanthus ornament (published in Rome about 1590) — all of 
which contributed to the Mughal artistic synthesis. 

Published: Lerner, The Flame and the Lotus, pp. 156-57, no. 60. 




165. 

A ROYAL TENT 

Mughal, mid-1 7th century 

Silk velvet, embroidered, with metal-wrapped 

yarns and cotton, 12 ft. 8 in. x 24 ft. 9 in. x 

24 ft. 6 in. (3 m. 80 cm. x 7 m. 42.5 cm. x 

7 m. 35 cm.) 

Mehrangarh Museum Trust, Fort, Jodhpur, 
on loan from Maharaja Sri Gaj Singhji II of 
Jodhpur (L21/1981) 



This portabi.k cloth palace, among the grandest monuments of the Shah 
Jahan period, is one of the very few imperial tents to have survived. Its 
miraculous preservation can be ascribed to centuries of protection in the 
noble fort at Jodhpur, where it and several others have been maintained since 
they were taken from the Mughals in the seventeenth century. But before 
recounting the drama of their coming to Jodhpur, we must recall that Shah 
Jahan took pleasure in hunting, campaigning, and traveling to distant parts 
of the empire, and that, like his ancestors, he lived for several months ol 
each year in the airy coolness of tents. They were designed and constructed 
in the farrashkana, a special branch of the imperial workshops to which, it 
appears, architects, textile designers, and even artists — all under the supervi- 
sion of the emperor himself — contributed ideas. 

Red tents such as this one were the prerogative of imperial princes. The 
form and magnificence of this tent suggest that it provided the artistic — indeed, 
theatrical — climax to a vast encampment through which visitors would have 
been led along increasingly splendid pathways as they approached the tempo- 
rary imperial quarters. Together forming the diwan-i c am (hall of public audi- 
ence) of the complex, within which an imperial prince or the emperor himself 
transacted affairs of state and received visitors, the tent's sides are festive 
with seven gracefully lobed archways. Entering the tent from bright sun- 
light or nocturnal darkness must have been awesome. Even after hundreds 
of years of mellowing, the inner walls still dazzle us. Their overall pattern 
of sensitively observed yet ornamental golden yellow flowers, embroidered 
in gold over a yellow silk core, is artfully designed. Narrow borders of 
similarly embroidered light blue silk relieve the intense red and yellows. 
Tassels, brilliantly twisted and sewn, fringe the lower edge of the ceiling 
where it meets the walls. 




165, detail 



252 



Amid the splendor of the interior walls is the colonnaded inner cham- 
ber, where the emperor or prince — the jewel within the setting — sat upon 
the richly covered bolsters composing the gaddi, or throne, and greeted 
honored visitors. 

The exterior walls and sloping roof ot the tent were originally covered 
with red and yellow striped masharu (cotton and silk fabric). The flat top of 
the roof is a square of red velvet, identical in its dimensions to the inner 
chamber beneath. Despite its age, the tent is in excellent condition except 
for the striped masharu, which has been replaced. To lend enlivening 
authenticity, seventeenth-century window and door hangings, made of bam- 
boo splints to form floral patterns, have been added at the suggestion of 
H. H. Gaj Singhji,who not only discovered this tent and several others in 
Jodhpur Fort but has also taken personal interest in its restoration and 
mounting. 

Seen in the light of Rajput history, as recounted by James Tod in his 
Annals, the tent evokes the heroic and dramatic times when Maharaja Jas want 
Singh of Marwar (1638-1678), all of his sons, and many other noble Rajputs 
lost their lives during the Mughal wars of succession and in their aftermath. 

How did this magnificent tent reach Jodhpur, and when? Fortunately, the 
design and artistry combine with historical evidence to provide the answers. Ma- 
haraja Jaswant Singh, who acquired it, was the senior prince of the House 
of Rathor and ruler of Marwar, the capital of which was the mighty fort at 
Jodhpur. Although a great Rajput nobleman, and of course a staunch Hindu, 
he conformed to the frequent Rajput practice of serving the Mughals. His 
career began under Shah Jahan, whom he first served in the Peshawar war. 

In 1657 Shah Jahan fell seriously ill, and his sons and their ambitious 
followers initiated struggles for the throne. Prince Dara-Shikoh, senior son 




165, detail 



Overleaf, 165 > 



and heir apparent, became regent. A serious student of religion, keen to 
reconcile the differences between Hindus and Muslims, he was admired by 
Rajputs, whose company he enjoyed and whose support he sought against 
his rival brothers. He appointed Maharaja Jaswant to the viceroyalty of Malwa; 
and when Dara-Shikoh's ambitious, soldierly, but religiously intolerant young- 
er brother, Prince Aurangzeb, threatened, Dara-Shikoh appointed Jaswant 
commander of the imperial armies. 

But fate intervened at the Battle of Dharmat, when the raja's vast army, 
composed mostly of Rajputs, was vanquished by the smaller force of Prince 
Aurang7xb, a surprising outcome that altered the course ot Indian history. 
According to legend, when Maharaja Jaswant returned to Jodhpur as a fugitive 

although he retained his shield and his honor — his proud wife was so 

dismayed by the defeat that she barred the gates of the fort. 

Aurangzeb soon captured Malwa. At the Battle of Jajau he again de- 
feated the imperial armies; afterward, he drove off Prince Dara-Shikoh, who 
was eventually captured and slain. Next, he deposed Shah Jahan and im- 
prisoned him in Agra Fort, where he died in 1666. 

After usurping the throne, Aurangzeb pardoned Maharaja Jaswant and 
asked his help in the campaign against yet another brother, Shah Shuja c . 
Jaswant, remaining secretly loyal to Prince Dara-Shikoh, warned Shah Shuja c 
of the plot. At the outset of the Battle of Khajwa, thirty miles north ot 
Allahabad, Jaswant launched a surprise attack upon the rear flank ot 
Aurangzeb's army, led by Prince Mu c azzam. After hacking his way through 
Aurangzeb's army, Jaswant dashed ahead to the splendid and unprotected 
imperial camp and plundered it. A considerable part of the loot was the 
present tent, which was packed with the others onto camels and carried oft 
to Jodhpur Fort. 

Maharaja Jaswant's struggles against Emperor Aurangzeb had not ended. 
Within a few years, according to Colonel Tod, Jaswant Singh's son and heir, 
Pnthi Singh, was summoned to the imperial court, where he was presented 
by the seemingly benevolent emperor with a khil'at (robe of honor). Soon 
after donning it, Pnthi Singh expired in great pain, envenomed through his 
pores. Not long thereafter, Jaswant Singh's only remaining son succumbed 
to the harsh climate of Afghanistan, where he had been sent with his tather 
by Aurangzeb to quash a rebellion. In 1678 the brokenhearted Jaswant Singh 
died at Kabul. Aurangzeb's revenge was complete. But in Jodhpur Fort the 
tents remain, mutely dramatic memorials of Rathor resistance to the Mughals. 

A note on the tent's later history: Maharaja Abhey Singh, son of Maharaja 
Ajit and grandson of Maharaja Jaswant Singh, is recorded as having used 
this tent in 1734 at the village of Horda near Ajmer for a meeting of the 
princes of Jaipur, Kotah, Bikaner, and Kishangarh. When Emperor 
Muhammad Shah (see no. 182) learned that the red Mughal tent had been the 
site of the signing of a Rajput treaty promising mutual assistance in times ot 
war, he indicated his displeasure — until he was assured by the diplomatic 
maharaja that the tent had served to unite the princes under the imperial 
insignia against a common enemy, the Marathas. This so pleased the em- 
peror that he issued a proclamation bestowing a khil c at upon him. 1 

1. Ren, History of Manmi\ part 1, pp. 347-48; reference generously supplied by Maharaj 
Prahlad Sin^h, Director, Mehrangarh Museum Trust, Jodhpur. 



166. 

ROCK-CRYSTAL BOWL 

Mughal, mid-17th century 

Height 3/4 in. (8.3 cm.), diameter 5V» in. 

(14.9 cm.) 

Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
(I.S. 986-1875) 



During the reign of Shah Jahan, floramania ran riot. Artist-craftsmen spe- 
cializing in hardstone abraded and cut jade and rock-crystal reliefs ot poppies, 
tulips, irises, and lilies into a treasure of splendid vessels. When Shah Jahan 
was in residence at Agra, 1 )elhi, or Lahore, he regularly met with the daroghas 
in charge of the studios and with their craftsmen to inspect the fruits ot their 
labors, only a very small sampling of which has survived. Each piece was 
unique, its compositional nuances the result of soulful dedication. Atter 
approval by the emperor, these objects reappeared in the hands ot sensitively 
attuned servants when the mood was suitably convivial or introspective 
and when the lighting emphasized an object's color and design. 

The vertical lobes of this rock-crvstal bowl are embellished with rhyth- 



256 




mically aligned lilies, and the base whirls with acanthus leaves that call for 
sunlight. Especially brilliant when filled with red or even white wine, it was 
designed to be drunk from or eaten from in changing light. Regrettably, 
such pieces are now so revered that only a few specialists touch them, while 
wearing white gloves. 

Published: The Art of India and Pakistan, p. 232, no. 1218, pi. 75; Hambly, Cities of 
Mughal India, p. 106, pi. 75; Zcbrowski, "Decorative Arts of the Mughal Period," 
p. 187, fig. 210; The Indian Heritage, p. 122, no. 373. 



This white nephrite wine cup probably was made in connection with the 
"Glorious Darbar" marking the end of the first epoch of Shah Jahan's reign. 
The event was celebrated at Delhi in late April 1657, the date inscribed on 
the cup. It is probably the most moving and artistically elevating of all Mughal 
jades, an object of unabashed splendor, voluptuous elegance, and tenderness. 
In it, the vegetal world metamorphoses into the animal, a sleight of hand 
and mind accomplished so slitheringly that transitions from gourd to goat 
are subtler than dusk. 

Highly stylized and unmistakably Mughal, it is also articulately 
naturalistic. The goat bleats plaintively, appreciative of Shah Jahan's sadnesses 
earlier in life, and lamenting painful times to come. 

Published: Welch, The Art of Mughal India, pp. 103, 176, fig. 5; Skelton, "The Shah 
Jahan Jade Cup," pp. 109-10, fig. 8; Skelton, Shah Jahan's fade Cup; Zcbrowski, 
"Decorative Arts of the Mughal Period," pp. 186-87, fig. 209; The Indian Heritage, 
pp. 118, 151, no. 356, pi. 12b. 



167. 

WINE CUP OF EMPEROR SHAH JAHAN 
Inscribed with the monogram of Shah Jahan: 
"Second Lord of the [auspicious] Conjunction" 
Mughal, dated a.h. 1067 (1657) 
White nephrite, height 2Vi in. (6.4 cm.), width 
5Vi in. (14 cm.) 

Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
(I.S. 12-1962) 



Lively animal sculpture has been a staple of Indian art, not least under the 
Mughals, who loved, respected, and understood animals, often in the para- 
doxical way of hunters. Inasmuch as their religious tradition did not encour- 
age large-scale figurative sculpture, their sculptural objects took on special 
importance. If small it must be, let it be wondrously small! was the credo of 
connoisseurs who usually conceived things either as big or little, not in between 
— vast forts and palaces, little pictures, and objects preciously small as jewels. 

Those made to be carried brought particular pleasure. A fine dagger at 
the belt, accessible to eye and hand, was aesthetically satisfying as well as 
necessary. Like jewels, daggers indicated a Mughal's position at court. 
Although very fine weapons were available in the bazaars, the best ones 



168. 

DAGGER WITH JADE HILT IN THE FORM 

OF A NILGAI 

Mughal, mid-1 7th century 

Length 15 in. (38.1 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
Gift of Alice Heeramaneck in memory of 
Nasli Heeramaneck (1985.58a) 



257 



167 



came from the imperial workshops, and wearing one signaled imperial 
approval. Thus, a courtier knew another's standing at a glance. A nobleman 
close to the emperor might have worn a jewel-sized portrait of Shah Jahan, 
while a member of Dara-Shikoh's faction proclaimed his loyalty with that 
prince's likeness on his turban. 

A close look at the many hundreds of elegant personages thronging the 
miniatures of the Padshah-nama reveals that by far the most common form 
of dagger worn was the katar (no. 178), with the curved khanjar (no. 98) 
next in popularity, followed by the straight-bladed kard (no. 131). Only a 
small number of hilts with animal finials are known, and these include exam- 
ples with a horse or nilgai, worn by Dara-Shikoh and Shah Shuja c . 1 Although 
animal-hilted daggers — ordinarily with horses — proliferated during the sev- 
enteenth and eighteenth centuries, they were exceedingly rare during the 
reign of Shah Jahan. A superbly sculptured hilt such as this one portraying a 
nilgai, or blue bull, with its acutely sensitive observation of the animal and 
its marvelous craftsmanship, could only have been made in the imperial 
ateliers. 2 

1. In the Windsor Castle Padshah-nama, both Dara-Shikoh and Shah Shuja c wear 
daggers with nilgai hilts in a miniature that shows Shah Jahan receiving an embassy 
of Europeans (folio 115v); and in a darbar scene by Balchand, Dara-Shikoh is por- 
trayed wearing a horse-hiked dagger (folio 72v). Few other animal hilts can be found 
in the manuscript, which is our most reliable source of information. 

2. Another nilgai hilt, carved in lighter, blue-green jade, is in the collection of Bharat 
Kala Bhavan, Varanasi. See: Morley, "On Applied Arts of India in Bharat Kala Bhavan," 
p. 117, pi. 12. 



258 



168 > 



169. 

SILVER FLASK FOR ANTIMONY 
Mughal, Agra or Delhi, mid-17th century 
Height 3'/ 2 in. (8.9 cm.) 
The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



Jahangir's and Shah Jahan's palaces contained silver furniture, ornaments, 
and vessels. Whatever survived into the eighteenth century caught the eyes 
of looters, who tossed virtually all of it into melting pots. This small 
screw-topped bottle somehow survived. It was made to contain antimony, 
a solution of kohl applied cosmetically by women and on the eyes of in- 
fants to protect them from the sun. It was cast in five parts: the stopper, 
which was designed so that its lobes are perfectly aligned with the acanthus 
leaves below; the body of the piece, melon shaped, with a stylized acanthus 
leaf design, cast in two parts almost invisibly fused across the middle; 
a disklike filler between the body and the base; and the base itself, an open- 
work acanthus design, riveted to the body. It was finished with a chisel 
file and graving tools. 

Despite its small size, the flask is architectural in conception. The up- 
wardly swelling form recalls Mughal domes and the stately, almost baroque 
columns of the Sawan Pavilion in the Red Fort of Delhi. Sturdily con- 
structed and weighty, it shows signs of long use, especially near the neck, 
where it was repeatedly and firmly knocked against the edge of another 
receptacle, creating a network of royal — and humanizing — dents. 1 

1. Related to this object is part of the silver finial of a courtier's stick (Collection the 
Marquess of Tavistock and the Trustees of Bedford Estates) inscribed, "Carolus Rex 
ad 1632, Dieu et Mon Droit; Carolus Rex; Natuis Nov. 1600." The stick, however, 
appears to have been assembled from various places over several centuries. See: The 
Indian Heritage, p. 162, no. 552. Another notable piece of Mughal silver is the cov- 
ered beaker in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. See: Welch, The Art of 
Mughal India, pi. 61; The Indian Heritage, p. 112, no. 323, p. 155, pi. 14c. 





260 



169 



170 



Paintings indicate that Mughal horses and elephants were as richly capar- 
isoned as the princes who rode them. Bridles were often brightened with 
rows of ornaments such as these, forming a rhythmic repeated pattern that 
is both eye-catching and meaningful. Very similarly arranged fish, the zodia- 
cal configuration of Pisces, are found on a talismanic bowl of the Jahangir 
period. 1 The fish is also seen as a standard in Muslim India (see no. 219); and 
during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, it was the heraldic symbol 
of the Muslim rulers of Lucknow. One wonders if these excitingly designed 
earlier examples, which bring to mind the ancient "animal style," might not 
have been associated with their owner's astrological sign. 



170. 

SYMPLEGMA OF FISH: ORNAMENTS 

FOR A BRIDLE 

Mughal, mid-17th century 

Silver with mercury gilding, diameter 1 in. 

(2.5 cm.) 

Private collection 



1. For the talismanic bowl, see A. Welch, Calligraphy in the Arts, pp. 186-87. 



Village women are frequently seen carrying huge earthen or brass vessels 
of well water on their heads, a graceful balancing act — and feat of strength 
— achieved with the help of a doughnut-shaped ring, or ondoni, made of 
wood padded with cloth. When the huqqa, or hubble-bubble, was invented, 
it was only natural that forms derived from these round waterpots and ondonis 
became part of the smoking apparatus. 

Against medical opinion, tobacco became greatly popular during the 
seventeenth century, and princely households vied with one another in the 
splendor of their smoking equipment. The simple earthenware of mouthpieces 
and waterpots was transformed into jewel-encrusted jade or other precious 
substances, the snakclike tube extending from pot to mouthpiece was often 
adorned with jewels or pearls, and ondonis were equally opulent. The pres- 
ent example is the noblest we have seen, made of massive gold enriched 
with marvelously enameled poppies against a white ground. 



171. 

RING FOR A HUQQA BOWL 

Mughal, mid-17th century 

Gold with vitreous enamel, height in. 

(3 cm.), diameter 5 3 /4 in. (14.5 cm.) 

The al-Sabah Collection, Dar al-Athar 

al-Islamiya, Kuwait National Museum 

(LNS.2.J) 



17! 



Although enameling was not unknown to the Mughals, and the hilt of 
Jahangir's dagger (no. 127) contains accents of enamel in several colors, im- 
perial jewelers usually employed thinly sliced rubies, emeralds, and other 
jewels, or jewellike bits of colored glass. 

Published: Islamic Art in the Kuwait National Museum, p. 127. 



172. 

OPIUM CUP IN THE FORM OF A POPPY 

Mughal, mid-17th century 

Jade with rubies and emeralds set in gold, 

height Va in. (1.8 cm.), diameter 2Vi in. 

(6.4 cm.) 

Private collection 



This compactly powerful little cup, shaped appropriately like an opium 
poppy, sparkled and shimmered when used to serve kawa, a potent blend of 
wine, spices, and opium. The handle, in the shape of a serrated poppy leaf, 
is inlaid with thinly sliced emeralds set in gold. It grows from the sensitively 
carved stem on the bottom of the cup, from which also emerge the fragile 
petals forming the bowl. Within, rubies and emeralds set in gold over reflective 
gold foil repeat the poppy motif. A central emerald, of brilliant color and 
purity and shaped like a mushroom, is brightened by light reflected from the 
surrounding white jade. The jewels, including a row of slightly rounded 
rubies just below the inner rim, are set with gold wire, skillfully hammered 
flat at the surface and often finely engraved. 

This brilliant bauble, made in the imperial ateliers for the use of the 
emperor or someone within his immediate circle, raises the topic of opium. 
In small quantities, it encouraged the dreamy indolence associated with Mughal 
palace life; in somewhat larger doses, it eased pain; but for those considered 
threatening to the throne, enforced daily quaffs brought oblivion and death. 



173. 

GUNPOWDER FLASK 

Mughal, mid-17th century 

Gray-green jade, diameter 4-V« in. (11.1 cm.) 

Private collection 



By the mid-seventeenth century, Mughal objects tended to be more splendid 
than practical, as is demonstrated by this powder flask in the shape of a 
turtle, which would have cracked if knocked too vigorously against the 
matchlock it served to load. Artistically moving and technically extraordinary, 
it was made from a large chunk of gray-green jade, appealingly enriched 
with mottled streaks dark as rain clouds. 



262 



172, inside 



172, outside 



After envisioning his design, the maker roughed in the basic shape, 
allowing for the floral ornament, neck, and pair of fittings shaped like lotus 
buds on the flat underside through which straps could be inserted. He then 
drilled and abraded a round opening less than an inch in diameter through 
which he hollowed out the inside, leaving only the very thin outer walls. 
After making a plug to fill in the hole and refining the reliefs of flowers, 
including a stylized lotus on the rounded back, he completed the flask with a 
final polishing. The stopper, now lost, was probably made of gold. 

The flask is based on Far Eastern prototypes, exemplified by polychromed 
wooden Korean examples that are more explicitly formed, with heads, feet, 
and tails. Both probably derive from a Chinese prototype. 1 

1. Shah c Abbas of Iran wears a similar flask at his belt in a portrait by Bishndas. See: 
Goddard, "Un Album de portraits des princes timurides," pp. 194-95, fig. 68. A 
later seventeenth-century powder flask of this shape, in white jade inlaid with jewels 
and enamel, is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. See: Joyaux et saris de 
I'lnde, p. 33, no. 4. For a Korean powder flask in the shape of a turtle, see: Mocs, 
Auspicious Spirits, no. 114. 



173, top 



173, bottom 



i 






174 



174. 

FRAGMENT OF A SHAWL BORDER 
Mughal, Kashmir, ca. 1640-50 
Pashmma, TA X 28% in. (18.5 x 72 cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
An, Hyderabad (81.2) 



Vkry i : f.w or the brilliantly designed shawls made in Kashmir for the Mughal 
court have survived from the seventeenth century, and this fragment from a 
shawl's end border (pallav) may be the earliest known example. The master- 
ful workmanship on loom, so appropriate for the sensitive, beautifully drawn 
flowering plants, gives some indication of the virtuosity and versatility of 
the Kashmiri shawl weavers. We can now see only in the mind's eye the 
many other elegant shawls these masters must have created, but we can 
imagine that the technique may even have excelled this exquisite work, and 
that each of the designs was different, for the Mughals admired not only 
perfection but exclusiveness. 

The white ground, now turned cream, is worked in twill tapestry weave. 
Narrow bands filled with undulating stems bearing leaves and small, three- 
petaled flowers act as a surround, and the field is patterned with an evenly- 
spaced row of delicate, naturalistic plants whose stems bend slightly under 
the weight of clusters of blossoms. (The borders on a complete shawl dat- 
ing to the late seventeenth century that is now in the Museum of Fine Arts, 
Boston, each have eleven plants; 1 this border may have had the same number.) 
The crimson outlines on the clustered pink petals and the sprouting buds 
could almost be brushstrokes, and the stems and curling, scalloped leaves, in 
a light blue-green edged in deeper green, have been woven with the same 
mature skill and confidence. 

The fabric is so deceptively soft, at first glance one thinks it is silk. 
Pashmma fabric, the fine woolen cloth used especially for Kashmiri shawls, 
has for centuries been prized for its lightness, warmth, and softness, and the 
Kashmiris have long specialized in weaving it, but the shawls made from it 
during the Mughal period were exceptional. Both the colored pattern and 
the white ground of this border are woven of shah tus (goat's fleece for a 
king), the rare and astonishingly fine wool collected in the Himalayas from 
thorn bushes on which mountain goats have scratched their beards, leaving 
small quantities behind. Although shawls made from less costly grades of 
pashmina cloth were richly embroidered, shah tus was considered so beautiful 
in itself and its natural colors, ranging from whites to golden tans to darker 



264 




hues, were so admired that floral patterns, like this one, were added only at 
the ends. 

The shawl in Boston and the few other seventeenth-century shawls that 
survive all have the shallow borders that appear to have been the fashion 
until the end of the eighteenth century. 2 The borders seem to have become 
broader with each decade. In 1668, F. Bernier reported that Kashmiri shawls 
were "ornamented at both ends with a sort of embroidery, made in the 
loom, about a foot in width." 3 This border measures just over seven inches. 

When exhibited at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London in 1982, 
this fragment and a group of shawls shown with it were attributed to the late 
seventeenth or early eighteenth century. 4 We would date the other shawls in 
the group from 1675 to 1700, but we believe this piece was produced earlier. 
The detailed, realistic execution of the flowering plants, by a weaver who 
seems to have faithfully followed the design he was given, perhaps by a 
Mughal artist, is more characteristic of Mughal decorative arts from about 
1625 to 1650. By the last two decades of the seventeenth century the designs 
on shawls, like those on the known examples of brocades and velvets from 
the period, had already become stiffer, more standardized, and the outlines 
more angular. In overall quality and refinement, this extraordinary fragment 
matches the Shah Jahani carpets and velvets/"' The superb weaving of the 
design and ground, in the most luxurious of materials, assures us that it was 
made for an enlightened patron, perhaps even Shah Jahan himself. 

j.M. 

1. Irwin, The Kashmir Shawls, pis. 5, 6. 

2. Ibid., pis. 1-4, 7. For other early examples, see: Murphy, "A Note on Some 
Recently Discovered Tipu Shawl Fragments," pp. 161-69. 

3. Bernier, Travels in the Mogul Empire, p. 403. 

4. The Indian Heritage, pp. 100-101, no. 282. 

5. Ibid., nos. 195, 199, 203, 219, 220. 

Published: The Indian Heritage, pp. 100-101, no. 282, ill. p. 79. 



d 



175 



175. 

MIRROR 

Mughal, mid-17th century 

Dark green jade with gold trellis pattern inset 

with white jade and rubies; mirror of rock 

crystal, 5Vn x 4 3 /a in. (13.1 x 11.2 cm.) 

Victoria and Albert Museum, London 

(I. S. 02587) 



Mughal taste occasionally oscillated between austerity and almost vul- 
gar sumptuousness. Here, opulence is overshadowed by perfection of pro- 
portion and craftsmanship — and by the look of crisp, smooth, touchable 
coolness. 

Silvered mirrors were first brought to India from the West during the 
Akbar period. Their success as presents and trade items was at first 
considerable; but too many were imported, and their novelty had so worn 
off by the 1620s that they were barely acceptable at court as gifts. Nevertheless, 
every palace worthy of the term had a shish mahal (chamber of mirrors) in 
which small pieces of mirror were set into the walls in arabesque patterns 
— magically effective by candlelight. Accounts of European travelers tell us 
that Shah Jahan's palace at Agra also contained many large decorative mirrors. 

Published: Grube, The World of Islam, pp. 160, 170, no. 105. 



176. 

EMPEROR AURANGZEB SHOOTING 
NILGAI 

Attributed to Hashim 

Mughal, ca. 1660 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 15 x 20V* in. (38 x 51 cm.) 

Miniature: 11 X \5Vs in. (28 x 38.5 cm.) 

Chester Beatty Library, Dublin 

(Ms. 11, no. 27) 



Muhyi ad-Din Muhammad Aurangzeb (r. 1658-1707), who ascended the 
imperial throne as c Alamgir I, was the sixth child and second son of Shah 
Jahan and Mumtaz-Mahal. Born in the course of an imperial progress from 
Gujarat to Agra in 1618, he soon experienced the realities of Mughal court 
life. When he was four, his father's embittered relationship with Emperor 
Jahangir led to open rebellion, and disrupted what might have been a joyous 
imperial childhood. In 1626, he and his elder brother, Crown Prince Dara- 
Shikoh, were demanded by Emperor Jahangir as hostages, and they re- 
mained at the imperial court, watched over by Nur-Jahan, until after 
Jahangir's death. 

Highly intelligent, Aurangzeb (Jewel in the Throne) learned Arabic, 
Persian, Chaghatai Turkish, and Hindi; his calligraphy — in Naskhi, Nasta c liq, 
and Shikasta script — was excellent. At an early age, he mastered the Qur 3 an 
and the Prophetic Traditions (Hadith). But he was not a withdrawn intellectual. 
At fourteen, while attending an elephant combat at Agra with his father and 
brothers, he ventured too close to the hulking beasts, one of whom, Sudhakar, 
charged him. Aurangzeb held steady, controlling his terrified horse, and 
hurled a spear at the advancing brute. With a sweep of his tusks, the ele- 
phant knocked down the prince's horse. Aurangzeb got to his feet, drew his 



266 



sword, and confronted his outraged and colossal attacker. Astounded observ- 
ers soon came to his rescue. Prince Shuja c cantered over and thrust a spear 
into the elephant's trunk, for which brave act he was tossed to the ground; 
Raja Jai Singh of Amber joined the fray — as did a throng of imperial guards 
armed with spears and poles topped with spinning fireworks, a standard 
device for controlling elephants. The episode ended when Suratsundar, the 
maddened elephant's opponent, renewed his attack and drove Sudhakar from 
the field. Aurangzeb's bravery was established. 

Other qualities contributed even more to his success. Unlike his older 
brother Dara-Shikoh's spiritual proclivities which followed the pattern of 
religious toleration set by Akbar, Aurangzeb's rigorous Muslim orthodoxy 
conformed precisely to the spirit of his time. All through life, he copied out 
Qur'ans, which he presented to holy shrines at Mecca and Medina and in India. 
Once, during a pitched battle, he astounded the enemy by calmly getting 
down from his mount, spreading his mat, and praying. History has shown 
that Aurangzeb could also be ruthlessly practical, and at times brilliantly 
devious. 

In the perspective of time, Aurangzeb emerges as a complex and fasci- 
nating man, and a highly controversial one. Was he a marble-hearted, power- 
mad bigot? Or a highly intelligent, troubled figure struggling to conform 
to an elevated, fiercely puritanical code, even more demanding of himself 
than of others? During his reign, the Mughal empire reached its peak in size 
and wealth. At last, the rival sultanates of the Deccan were defeated and 
joined to the empire. But Mughal power was in decline. Aurangzeb spent 
most of his years struggling to control sprawling, often rebellious provinces; 
and as he lay dying, at the age of ninety, he wrote troubled letters confess- 
ing that his grand schemes had failed. 

Aurangzeb was forty when he seized power from his ailing father and 
carried out his cruelly effective plots against his brothers. A fabulous empire 
was his, with all its magnificent treasures, superb cities, forts, and palaces, 
and vast human resources. At first, apparently, he found pleasure in his new 
grandeur. He mounted the Peacock Throne, wore the imperial jewels, viewed 
the treasures of the library, inscribing his name in many of its great 
manuscripts, listened to the court musicians, and carried on the traditions of 
artistic patronage. His enthronement as Emperor c Alamgir (Seizer of the 
Universe), the culmination of two months of festivities, was held at Delhi 
on June 5, 1658, a day declared astrologically auspicious. The ceremony was 
notable for its splendor, outdoing all previous imperial Mughal celebrations. 
The richest jewels and objects of art were assembled from the royal treasuries, 
jeweled gold globes and magnificent textiles were suspended from the ceil- 
ings and arches, musicians and dancers performed, and fireworks turned the 
skies over the Jamuna River into a fiery paradise. 

In 1659, Aurangzeb commissioned a small but superb mosque in the 
Red Fort at Delhi, a building that took five years to complete and represents 
the emperor's usually unexpressed — and too seldom recognized — taste for 
the arts. The mosque's intimate scale and white marble reliefs, with succu- 
lent still-life carvings of fruits and almost rococo ornament, sheds appealing 
light on the usually austere, self-denying emperor. 

Aurangzeb was also a perceptive and enthusiastic patron of painting — at 
the outset of his reign. Emperor Aurangzeb Shooting Nilgai completely belies 
its patron's reputed lack of interest in the arts. The landscape, probably in 
the southern Deccan, stretches out past a perspective view of imperial 
elephants, a town, and a fort, all painted in copious and accurate detail. The 
young ruler has just fired the bullet, striking his quarry through the heart. 
Ahead of him the tame nilgai, which had lured his fellow creature to the kill, 
seems startled, and cognizant of his role in the plot. 

This great picture can be ascribed to Hashim, a remarkable artist who 
also painted a famous portrait of Aurangzeb receiving his son, Muhammad 
A c zam, with an assemblage of courtiers. 1 Just as Govardhan, who special- 
ized in ethereal portrayals of holy men, can be associated with Prince Dara- 
Shikoh, so can Hashim, known for his keenly observed depictions of courtly 
magnificence, be linked to Aurangzeb, for whom he painted these two ex- 



Overleaf, 176> 




269 




270 



traordinary miniatures before the emperor's enthusiasm for painting was 
smothered by puritanical orthodoxy. 

1. For Hashim's portrait of Aurangzeb and his son, see: Welch, Imperial Mughal 
Painting, pi. 37 (there attributed to Bichitr). 

Published: Arnold, The Library of A. Chester Beatty, vol. 1, p. 48, no. xxvii, vol. 3, 
pi. 90; Welch, The Art of Mughal India, pp. 122, 176, fig. 6; Welch, Imperial Mughal 
Painting, pp. 114-15, pi. 38; In the Image of Man, p. 155, no. 212. 



If weapons can be lyrical, this one is. Organic as a seashell, with its row of 
gently swaying flowers along the grip, acanthus leaves, and unexcelled 
craftsmanship, this dagger is the finest of the pistol-grip type. It can be 
assigned to an imperial artist-craftsman, perhaps to the genius who made 
Shah Jahan's gourd-into-goat wine cup (no. 167). Presumably, it was carved 
for Aurangzeb, who is shown wearing a very similar weapon in the portrait 
of him hunting nilgai (no. 176). A thorough search through the miniatures 
of the Windsor Padshah-nama, the best source for weaponry at Shah Jahan's 
court, reveals no examples of this form of hilt, which first appears in por- 
traits of Aurangzeb. The origin of the form can be traced to the Deccan, 
where it must have been admired by Aurangzeb and adapted for his use 
during his years there as viceroy. In early stages of their evolution, which 
probably began in the southern Deccan, pistol grips terminated not in the 
familiar rounded abstract shape but in parrot heads, complete with beaks 
and eyes. Deccani examples of the seventeenth century (such as no. 202) 
already incorporate this change. After Aurangzeb had established a vogue 
for them, pistol-grip hilts became common at the Mughal court during the 
late seventeenth and the eighteenth century; some of them archaistically 
repeat the original parrot design. 

Published: Notable Acquisitions 1982-1983, pp. 12-13. 



177. 

KHANJAR 

Mughal, ca. 1640 

Watered steel and white nephrite, 

length U¥h in. (36.5 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 

Purchase, Mr. and Mrs. Nathaniel Spear, Jr. 

Gift (1982.321) 



This richly jeweled katar, with its attractive white enameling and jewels 
set in gold, is of a sort especially favored by Shah Jahan. Lighter in weight 
and with a less thick blade than most katars, it was designed to be impres- 
sive at court, not, like workaday examples, to stab. Its basic form is unique 
to India, and it is represented frequently in the Hamza-nama, as well as in 
other early Mughal manuscripts. The type, with its peculiar triangular blade 
and hilt composed of two straight uprights, to protect the hand and wrist, 
with crossbars between, probably originated in southern India. Many 
examples, with richly ornamented steel hilts, are known from Tanjore. We 
have not found them in paintings from pre-Mughal Rajput, Sultanate, or 
western Indian sources. They seem to have been common, however, in the 
Deccan and at Rajput courts of the Mughal period. 



178. 

KATAR 

Mughal, mid-17th century 
Steel blade, gold and enamel hilt with rubies, 
emeralds, and diamonds, length 15 3 /4 in. 
(40 cm.) 

Collection Moke Mokotoff, New York 




178 



To sit and eat upon at courts of the Mughal period, printed and painted 
cotton dastarkanas, or floor spreads, sometimes referred to as "summer 
carpets," were stretched out, held down at the edges by ornamental weights, 
or mir-e farsh (lords of the carpet). During the luxurious late seventeenth 
century, scores of artistically marvelous textiles, representing months or 
even years of work by skilled craftsmen, were used once or twice, and 
discarded as too worn for princely use. Those in charge of the palace stores, 
however, laid up stocks of floor spreads, dress lengths, velvets, and other 
yardage in untold numbers and looked after them so well that a few — like 
this one — survived pristinely in godowns to this day. 

With its central pattern of naturalistically drawn block-printed poppies 
silhouetted against a white field, and its sensuously scrolling blossoms, vines, 
and leaves against the muted earth green of the border, the design of this 
floor spread is bold enough to stun at a distance and fine enough to enjoy 
close at hand. The flowers, with their carefully modeled petals, spirited leaves, 
and vestigial roots, bring to mind the painted poppy from the Rajput court 
of Kishangarh (no. 248). That the painted poppy is presumably by an artist 
who had migrated from Burhanpur, the major Mughal center in the Deccan, 
further supports the supposition that this dastarkana is from the same city, 
which was noted for its printed and drawn cottons in Mughal style. 1 

1. Sections of very similar floor spreads are in the National Museum of India, New 
Delhi; Calico Museum of Textiles, Ahmedabad (see: Irwin and Hall, Historic Textiles 
of India, pp. 33-34, nos. 23, 24, pi. 9); Victoria and Albert Museum, London; The 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; and private collections. 




179. 

FLOOR SPREAD 

Probably Burhanpur, late 17th or 

early 18th century 

Cotton, resist dyed, 9 ft. 1014 in. X 12 ft. 8 in. 
(3 x 3.86 m.) 
Private collection 





fX« o 

• • • % m f*.i| 

ffc jjjb Sjp Sfc < fc 

It. m —*^£ 




179, detail 



180, front 



180, back 



Emperors, sultans, and their courtiers were passionate collectors and 
connoisseurs of precious stones, which they bought, wore, gave and re- 
ceived as gifts, and ordered carved in pleasing patterns. This remarkably 
large, splendidly carved emerald, of excellent color and quality, is adorned 
on one side with conventionalized flowers in Mughal style and on the other 
with a Shi c ite inscription with blessings for the twelve imams. 

At the top appears "The Merciful One, The Compassionate One"; 
beneath: 

O God 

God bless Muhammad and c Ali 
and Fatima and al-Husain 
and al-Hasan and c Ali 
and Muhammad and Ja c far 
and Musa 
1107 [1695] 

and c Ali and Muhammad 
and c Ali 

and al-Husaini and the steadfast Mahdi. 

A Colombian emerald, it might have reached India as part of the stock 
of an international gem dealer, such as Jean-Baptiste Tavernier, whose six 
voyages to India between 1641 and 1667 enabled him to write Travels in India, 
a fascinating firsthand account of the country and its people. In 1665, before 
leaving India, he was summoned by the emperor, who was eager that he be 
shown the imperial jewels. Tavernier was conducted into a small apartment, 
where the emperor was seated on his throne. "I found in this apartment 
c Akil Khan, chief of the jewel treasury, who, when he saw us, commanded 
four of the imperial eunuchs to bring the jewels, which were carried in two 
large wooden trays lacquered with gold leaf, and covered with small cloths 
made especially for the purpose — one of red and the other of green bro- 
caded velvet. After these trays were uncovered, and all the pieces had been 



180. 

INSCRIBED EMERALD 
Mughal, dated a.h. 1107 (1695-96) 
217.8 carats, 2 X IV2 in. (5.1 X 3.8 cm.) 
Collection Allan Caplan, New York 



181. 

JAR AND COVER 
Mughal, ca. 1700 

Cloisonne enamel on gold, height 5 5 /« in. 
(14.3 cm.) 

The Cleveland Museum of Art, Purchase from 
the J. H. Wade Fund (62.206) 




181 



counted three times over, a list was prepared by three scribes who were 
present. For the Indians do everything with great circumspection and patience, 
and when they see any one who acts with precipitation, or becomes angry, 
they gaze at him without saying anything, and smile as if he were a madman. 

"The first piece which c Akil Khan placed in my hands was the great 
diamond [apparently the famed Koh-i Nur, a large part of which is now set 
in the British crown], which is a round rose, very high at one side. At the 
basal margin it has a small notch and flaw inside. Its water is beautiful, and it 
weighs 319V2 ratis, which are equal to 280 of our carats. . . . When Mir Jumla, 
who betrayed the King of Golconda, his master, presented this stone to 
Shah Jahan ... it was then in the rough, and weighed . . . 787 x h carats; and it 
had several flaws." 

Tavernier continued his account of his viewing of the Mughal jewels 
with a description of the cutting of the "great diamond" by one Sicur 
Hortensio Borgio, who "spoilt the stone, which ought to have retained a 
greater weight; and instead of paying him for his work, the Emperor fined 
him 10, 000 rupees, and would have taken more if he had possessed it ... he 
was not a very accomplished diamond cutter." He was then shown a pear- 
shaped diamond, "of good form and fine water," other fine diamonds, sev- 
eral jewels composed of diamonds, and some splendid pearls, one of which 
"of a lively white ... is the only jewel which Aurangzeb . . . has himself pur- 
chased on account of its beauty, for the rest either came to him from Dara- 
Shikoh, his eldest brother, he having appropriated them after he had caused 
his head to be cut off, or they were presents made to him after he ascended 
the throne. I have elsewhere remarked that the Emperor has no great regard 
for jewels, priding himself only on being a great zealot of the law of 
Muhammad. " l 

Because the present emerald is inscribed with Shi c ite formulas, more 
appropriate at courts of the Deccan, such as Golconda, it might have been 
carved for a Deccani prince. 

1. Tavernier, Travels in India, vol. 1, pp. 314-19. 

Published: Caplan, "An Important Carved Emerald," pp. 1336-37; Bancroft, "Great 
Gems and Crystal Mines," p. 165; Sinkankas, Emerald and Other Beryls, p. 113; Sweat 
of the Sun, pi. 5; Bari and Poirot, Larousse, pp. 132-33. 



This small jar belies its size and the elegance of its decoration by sitting 
assertively. The crisply articulate enameling — in white, green, translucent 
yellow, and pink — reminds us of both Mughal carpet designs and manuscript 
illumination. Although the technique was employed at the Mughal court at 
least as early as the Jahangir period (see nos. 127, 129), few early examples 
have survived, both because of the imperial preference for jewels and because 
of its fragility, for enamel cracks and splinters as easily as glass. 

The technique is complex, and in India is practiced by family workshops 
whose secrets have been passed on from one generation to the next. After 
the object to be enameled has been made by a metalsmith, preferably of 
gold, with its wall-like enclosures to contain the enamel, the surface is pre- 
pared by the master craftsman. He engraves designs and neatly scars the 
surface with striations to hold fast the enamels, which are made of finely 
ground colored glass or minerals. While a small tubular charcoal-burning 
oven, open at the front, heats up to the required temperature, the enameler 
selects his glassy materials from the small flasks in which they are stored and 
mixes them with water on a palettelike receptacle. With a fine spatula, he 
then fills the enclosure walls with the slightly gritty substances, which must 
be applied and fired one by one in prescribed order, lest the progressive 
applications of heat damage the less hardy ones. Gripping the object with 
tongs, he then places it in the oven, allowing it to heat just long enough to 
vitrify into a desirably smooth surface. He inspects the work frequently, and 
progresses from one color to the next until the work is done. 

Published: Welch, The Art of Mughal India, pp. 123, 172, no. 62; The Indian Heritage, 
p. 112, no. 324. 




The Mughal empire, after the death of Aurangzeb in 1707, could be likened 
to a magnificent flower slowly wilting and occasionally dropping a petal, its 
brilliance fading, its stalk bending ever lower. The grand legend persisted. 
The empire was still admired for its civilization; it remained awesomely rich 
and was even feared for its lingering might; but the nine emperors who 
ruled between 1707 and the exile of the last Mughal ruler in 1858 lacked 
stature. The infinite vision of Babur and Akbar had narrowed; Jahangir's 
imperial curiosity, Shah Jahan's refined sense of governmental responsibility, 
and Aurangzeb's ambition, piety, and sadness — all were replaced at best by 
specimens of poignant weakness, royal foolery, admirable stoicism, and tragi- 
comic reveling. 

Raushan Akhtar Muhammad Shah (r. 1719-48), known as Rangila (the 
Pleasure Loving), perfectly exemplifies a wilting imperial blossom, espe- 
cially in this twilight image. One sympathizes both with the ladies assigned 
to carry their bulky, rather adenoidal king and with Muhammad Shah, whose 
lot was less easy than this picture suggests. At the age of eighteen, he had 
been placed on the Mughal throne by two unscrupulous and ambitious gover- 
nors, the Sayyid brothers, who saw him as a docile puppet. They were 
mistaken. Assisted by Nizam al-Mulk of Hyderabad, the kingmakers were 
disposed of by assassination and poison. For this service, the nizam was 
appointed vizier; but in 1722 he withdrew to Hyderabad to strengthen his 
own now virtually independent kingdom. Sadly for the empire, and for 
Muhammad Shah, other rich provinces of the empire, Oudh and Bengal, 
also became in effect separate domains. Moreover, the Marathas spread their 
power far and wide; Agra was captured by the Jats; the Rohilla Afghans 
founded Rohilkhand; and in the Punjab, the Sikhs usurped the central power. 
Without these territories Muhammad Shah's empire had reverted to a size 
not much larger than that inherited by Akbar. 



182. 

EMPEROR MUHAMMAD SHAH 

CARRIED IN A PALANQUIN BY LADIES 

Mughal, ca. 1735 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 16 x 20 in. (40.6 x 50.8 cm.) 

Miniature: KPA X 14 in. (26.4 x 35.6 cm.) 

Collection Kasturbhai Lalbhai, Ahmedabad 



Although weakened, Muhammad Shah persevered. But he realized that 
his and the empire's great days were over, and he decided to make the best of 
it. Blessed with a talent for pleasure, Muhammad Shah yielded to most 
temptations, some of which were respectable, or even admirable. He 
supervised the creation and re-creation of beautiful gardens; and he delighted 
in the conventional triad of joys: the wine was excellent, as were the women, 
and for him song was especially rewarding. He was a gifted musician and 
poet. If Mughal power was failing disastrously, Mughal culture was not. 

Acceptance became Muhammad Shah's policy. As his political strength 
waned, he found ever greater diversion in gardens, poetry readings, recitals, 
gastronomy, painting, and lovemaking. With such consolations and the ad- 
vice of holy men, Muhammad Shah stood fast — until the combination of 
imperial wealth and weakness sparked trouble. Nadir Shah of Iran, a greedy 
Turkman soldier of fortune, led an army into India in 1739. The imperial 
forces gave way, and the piratical Iranian marched into Delhi, where 
Muhammad Shah played the roles of host and victim. Despite efforts to 
suppress violence, a scuffle led to wholesale slaughter. When Nadir Shah and 
his armies finally left, they carted off enough treasure to enrich dozens of 
great libraries and art museums. Muhammad Shah especially regretted the 
loss of a favorite series of pictures, Akbar's Dastan-i Amir Hamza (see no. 91). 
A small parade of exceptionally strong camels labored under the dead weight 
of another major imperial possession, now dismantled — that splendid symbol 
of Mughal supremacy, the Peacock Throne (see no. 154). 

Although historians dwell on Muhammad Shah's political and military 
failures, art connoisseurs judge him less severely. For Rangila's artists served 
him well, blending moods with the expertise of a skilled perfumer. In this 
riverside view at dusk, nostalgia, dissolution, and poignant luxury are con- 
cocted by a gifted painter from marvelous women, superb ornament, and 
the wistful, not quite obese emperor. 1 

1. For other pictures of Muhammad Shah, see: Welch, The Art of Mughal India, nos. 
77, 78; Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, pi. 39; Falk and Archer, Indian Miniatures, no. 
160. 



"A rose and plume composed of diamonds, rubies, sapphires, and emeralds, 
which though not of great value made a pompous appearance" — such was 
the contemporary description by Edward Ives of this turban ornament, a 
bauble vibrant with history. The provinces of Mughal India were being 
dismembered bit by bit, and the ornament was a reward from an elderly 
Mughal nobleman, Mir Ja c far c Ali Khan, to Admiral Charles Watson, who 
with Robert Clive had set him up as nawab of Bengal following the Battle 
of Plassey in 1757. The appointment of this amenable gentleman to replace 
the defeated nawab Siraj ad-Daula, the last Mughal governor of Bengal to 
stand up against the British, marked the transition from Bengal as a state 
allied to the British to one sponsored by them and wholly under their control. 
Henceforth, the British were committed to ruling not only Bengal but in 
due course all of India. 

Jewels waxed in size, if not in quality, as Mughal power waned, and 
their designs decreased in inventiveness and authority. Nevertheless, these 
feather and flower ornaments, enlivened with pendant emerald and baroque 
pearl, are both impressive and engagingly playful. The plumelike jigha was 
intended for the upper front part of the turban; the sarpati, designed as three 
flowerlike elements, each with a large central stone surrounded by petals set 
with diamonds, was held beneath it by ropes of pearls swagged around the 
turban. However "pompous" the jewels might have seemed to some 
eighteenth-century British eyes, Admiral Watson, once home, included them 
in a family portrait. 

Published: Stronge, "Mughal Jewellery," pp. 2-6; Sotheby's, London, April 22, 1983, 
lot 274, with illustration showing a portrait of Admiral Watson wearing Indian dress, 
including these jewels. 

I am indebted to Susan Stronge for her generosity in making available to me the 
results of her extensive and original research. 



276 



183. 

TURBAN JEWELS: JIGHA AND SARPATI 
Mughal, Bengal, Murshidabad, ca. 1757 
Gold and silver set with diamonds, emeralds, 
rubies, sapphire, and pearl; champlevc enamel 
on reverse, height 8Vk in. (20.6 cm.) 
Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
(I. S. 3-1982) 



Artfully snipped from the wing covert of a male Impeyan pheasant 1 — a 
bird found in the Himalayas at eight to ten thousand feet in Afghanistan, 
Tibet, and Bhutan — the electrifyingly vivid metallic greens and copper red 
of this sarpech blaze in sunlight, outdazzling comparable turban ornaments 
made from precious stones set in gold. In paintings, rajas in the hunting field 
wear feathered turban ornaments, perhaps in the hope that such natural 
adornments will not alarm the lions or tigers. Frequently, in pictures, Lord 
Krishna, splendid as a peacock, is crested with feathers; and it is conceivable 
that this sarpech was intended for a devotee dancing the role of the god 
during a festival or rite. 



184. 

FEATHER SARPECH 

Mughal or Rajput, Rajasthan, 18th century 

Height 5 in. (12.7 cm.) 

Private collection 



1. Named after Mary, Lady Impey; see no. 281. 






183 



184 



277 



185 



185. 

HUQQA BOWL 
Mughal, 18th century 

Painted glass, height 8 in. (20.3 cm.), diameter 
6Va in. (17.2 cm.) 

Los Angeles County Museum of Art, from 
the Nasli and Alice Heeramaneck Collection, 
Museum Associates Purchase (M. 76. 2. 12) 



The glass blower of this piece made a rewardingly perfect shape; and the 
enamel painter decorated it with rhythmically lively lotus flowers harmoni- 
ously matched to the rounded bowl. Not intended for the isolation of a 
museum vitrinc, the bowl once added a small accent to an ambience crowded 
with exciting objects: a striped or flowered floor spread, trays of sweetmeats, 
wine bottles and cups, an incense burner, lamps, and, most ornamental of 
all, the prince and his courtiers and attendants. 

Glassmaking in India can be traced back to Chalcolithic times. Glass 
bangles have been found in southern Baluchistan, and vitreous material was 
unearthed at Harappa. During the Akbar period, European glass was brought 
to the Mughal court in the form of spectacles, drinking glasses, and mirrors. 
Seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Mughal and Rajput pictures show glass 
flasks and cups of many varieties, most of which appear to be of Indian 
manufacture. 



Published: Welch, The Art o f Mughal India, p. 174, pi. 81; The Arts o f India and Nepal, 
no. 234; Dikshit, History of Indian Glass, p. xib; The Indian Heritage, pp. 124-25, no. 
386. 



186. 

IN A HAREM GARDEN 

Attributed to Faiz Allah 

Mughal, Faizabad, ca. 1765 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 17>4 X 12% in. 

(45 x32 cm.) 

The David Collection, Copenhagen (46/1980) 



While the Mughal empire weakened at the center, major provincial capitals 
flourished at Faizabad and Lucknow in Oudh, Murshidabad in Bengal, and 
Hyderabad in the Deccan. Poets, dancers, musicians, and artists, lured by 
generous patronage, moved from Delhi to these new centers of culture and 
power, where nostalgia for home often added to the temper of their work. 

The pattern of events in Oudh was characteristic. Emperor Muhammad 
Shah appointed Sa c adat Khan Burhan al-Mulk to the governorship in 1724. 
Three years later, he had become its autonomous ruler, while retaining the 
title of governor, and established a dynasty that survived until the British 
exiled Wajid c Ali Shah to Calcutta a year before the Sepoy Rebellion of 1857. 



278 




186 




187 



Although Sa c adat Khan is not known as a patron, his successors made their 
marks on the arts. Safdar Jang (r. 1739-54) is noted for his fine tomb and 
garden in Delhi. Under his son, Jalal ad-Din Haidar Shuja c ad-Daula 
(r. 1754-75), and grandson, Asaf ad-Daula (r. 1775-97), Lucknowand Faizabad 
developed from provincial Mughal centers into courts notable for their par- 
ticularly perfumed "nawabi" extremes. During the late eighteenth century, 
following the Battle of Baksar in 1764, the British presence was felt; and by 
1775, the culture of Oudh was becoming markedly cosmopolitan, exotic, 
and eccentric. 

In a Harem Garden so swarms with late Mughal pleasantries it fairly 
bursts its borders. Begums of every degree of seniority and their myriad 
attendants inhabit a multilevel suite of idealized palaces surrounded by for- 
mal gardens and set within a landscape that stretches across the world. The 
ladies loll, smoke huqqas, perform and listen to music, draw, fly kites, play 
with yo-yos, and long for their beloveds, who are probably among the lively 
hunters barely visible beyond the bridge. They are delicately reminded of 
love's pangs by the peacock on the roof, who turns masterfully to his hen. 
Wherever we look this pictorial aviary, containing as many cranes and ducks 
as women, hints of the birds' freedom — in contrast to the ladies' imprison- 
ment in their Indian rococo cage, as is evident from its adamantine walls and 
even more adamantine amazons who bracket the foreground. 

Faiz Allah, to whom this wedding cake of a picture can be attributed, 
created here a wonderland of perspective. Colonnades, watercourses, ver- 
dant allees, and many-storied pavilions dance to the rhythm of his vanishing 
points, sprinkled like confetti and charging the already festive atmosphere. 
Another European technique — the diminution of forms in space — is also 
applied here, in the elfin junior wives at play on looming pavilion terraces. 1 

1. For a signed painting by Faiz Allah, see: Welch, Room for Wonder, no. 33. 



A happy and ornamental young couple long for one another with well-bred 
discretion in an idyllic setting rustling with flowers in the breeze and sug- 
gestively amorous animals. With beguiling coyness, the lovers sit under a 
decorative tree joyously stocked with songbirds while listening to a not 
distractingly beautiful musician. In creating this eighteenth-century Lucknow 
"Valentine," Mir Kalan flirts daringly with romantic tenderness that edges 
on sentimentality and archness, a considerable achievement — and one char- 
acteristic of the late Mughal culture of Oudh. To do so, he plucked ideas and 
motifs from many sources. The mood is akin to that of Lucknow gazals, 
sweetly spiced love lyrics, while the couple was translated from Riza c Abbasi's 
languorously cloying seventeenth-century Safavid counterparts. With addi- 
tional touches of eighteenth-century French boudoirie, Mir Kalan produced 
a thoroughly delightful fantasy. Pleasure-bent as the picture might seem, it 
also can be interpreted mystically: the couple loving one another in their 
garden become souls loving God in paradise. 

Iranian elements frequently contributed to the zest of Lucknow art, 
which often reflected the frivolity of the later Safavid court. This link to 
Iran, which was shared with Hyderabad, gained strength from the fact that 
the nawabs of Lucknow, like the Safavid shahs, were Shi c ite rather than 
Sunni Muslims. On the other hand, one might ascribe the fundamental seri- 
ousness of most imperial Mughal art to the dynasty's firm Sunni affiliations, 
and to their rivalry with the Safavids. 



187. 

LOVERS IN A LANDSCAPE 

By Mir Kalan Khan 

Mughal, Lucknow, ca. 1775 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 8 3 /4 x 6 in. 

(22.2x15.2 cm.) 

The David Collection, Copenhagen (50/1981) 



This splendidly cast pair of bronze cannon unites European, presumably 
French, rococo elegance with imaginative Indian splendor. Cast for Tipu 
Sultan, who was known as "the Tiger," their muzzles, trunions, and cascabels 
and even the dolphins on the barrels end in tigers' heads. One barrel is 
marked with the sword of c Ali, the other with a dagger within a field of 
tiger stripes. More to the Mughal taste, the muzzle astragals are in the form 



188. 

A PAIR OF CANNON 
Mysore, Seringapatam, late 18th century 
Bronze, with brass bearing, length 46 in. 
(116.8 cm.), diameter 18 in. (45.7 cm.) 
Private collection 



188 



of chains, edged with a pattern of flowers and leaves. Like the turban orna- 
ment from Bengal (no. 183), the cannon, which were probably made in 
Tipu's own foundries at Seringapatam, bring to notice an important chap- 
ter of history. 

Muslim power was not limited to northern India. During the mid- 
eighteenth century, in the peaceful and prosperous Hindu state of Mysore, 
Haidar c Ali, an illiterate but canny Muslim soldier of fortune, entered the 
service of Nanraj, the prime minister. Courageous, obliging, and burningly 
ambitious, Haidar took over the powers of Nanraj and, expanding his 
territories by the sword, subjugated many adjoining principalities. A sud- 
denly militant and Muslim Mysore alarmed the Marathas, the nizam of 
Hyderabad, and the British, who saw it as a threat to Madras. In 1765 the 
Marathas invaded Mysore, forcing Haidar to forfeit lands and pay a gener- 
ous indemnification. A year later, the British joined with the nizam and 
repeated the plot; and soon, a triple alliance further menaced the Muslim 
upstart, who countered by buying off the Marathas. But partners changed 
as at a cotillion: when the British and the nizam's armies invaded Mysore in 
1767, the nizam turned coat, siding with Haidar. The British triumphed, 
and they now allied with Haidar, promising to come to his aid if another 
power attacked. 

When the Marathas assailed Haidar in 1771, however, the British did 
nothing. Haidar's mounting displeasure broke forth in 1779, when he joined 
the Marathas and the nizam in a grand confederacy against them. In July 
1780, Haidar, at the head of 80,000 men and 100 guns, attacked the British 
in the Carnatic. He seized Arcot, so alarming the British that Warren Has- 
tings dispatched an army under Sir Eyre Coote, commander-in-chief in India. 
Haidar was defeated at Porto Novo in 1781. 

Haidar's day was ending. Within two years he succumbed to cancer. 
But the wars continued. Haidar was succeeded by his son Tipu Sultan 
(1749-1799), who was equally brave and warlike and who became a legend 
of cruelty in England, where his polychromed wooden tiger, devouring an 
Englishman who screeches at the turn of a crank, is a popular exhibit in the 
Victoria and Albert Museum. For the time being, however, the British fa- 
vored peace. In 1784 they signed the Treaty of Mangalore with Tipu, to the 



282 



displeasure of Lord Cornwallis, governor-general of India, who differed 
with this policy. Fearing the alliance between Tipu and the French, and 
believing an attack was imminent, he sought alignment with the nizam, so 
offending Tipu that in 1789 he invaded Travancore, a state under British 
protection. Cornwallis, the nizam, and the Marathas now conspired against 
Tipu in a campaign that lasted two years. 

The alliance was potent and relentless. Bangalore, Tipu's metropolis, 
was captured in March 1791, and by May 13 Lord Cornwallis's armies nearcd 
his capital, Seringapatam. But Tipu's abilities as strategist and diplomat held 
them at bay; and although forced to surrender half his dominions to the 
alliance in 1792, he remained alive and independent. 

Ever resourceful, Tipu rebuilt his fortifications and armies. He also 
revived his alliance with the French, thereby outraging yet another 
Englishman, Lord Wcllesley, who had succeeded Lord Cornwallis. Welles- 
ley joined with the Marathas and attacked. Tipu lost two battles before 
withdrawing to Seringapatam, where against discouraging odds he fought 
bravely to the death. 

Admired in India as a pioneer anticolonialist, Tipu Sultan in the West 
has evoked responses mixed as those to hot chillies — mouth-puckering but 
strangely appealing. In his day, he caught the public fancy; and his renown 
has been kept alive by the many works of art associated with his life and 
death. Scores of English engravings, lithographs, drawings, and paintings 
document his wickedness while depicting his slayers' glory. His polychromed 
wooden tiger still roars while its prone Englishman howls, his tent and other 
souvenirs arc prized by the descendants of Lord Clive, and at Seringapatam, 
visitors stroll fascinated through his palaces, gardens, and mosque. His pair 
of cannon, perhaps dating to the time of his alliance with the French, evokes 
Tipu's elegance, and recall his quixotic stand against incomparably greater 
forces. 1 

1. An almost identical pair, found in the fort at Seringapatam along with 371 other 
"brass guns" and a large number of other weapons, is illustrated in Porter, The 
Storming of Seringapatam, p. 139. 

Published: The Indian Heritage, p. 140, no. 467. 



THE SULTANS 
OF THE DECCAN 



189. 
RAHL 

Deccan, probably Ahmadnagar, 
ca. 1588-89 

Bronze, inset with turquoise, 
height 1 8 Vi in. (47 cm.) 

Collection Mian Bashir Wali Mohamed, London 



It is appropriate that the rahl to support the holy book of a religion from 
the stark desert lands of Arabia should be a simple stand of crossed boards, a 
sensible furnishing designed to hold a Qur 5 an open to a chosen folio in a 
mosque, in a madrasa, or at home. Rahls were initially made of wood, 
perhaps by makers of camel saddles. Although the fundamental structure 
remained as sparely practical as the saddle which may have inspired it, in 
time Qur^an stands were enriched with carved arabesques and made from 
materials that were scarcely austere. Some Indian rahls, honoring the book's 
sanctity while proclaiming the owner's or donor's piety and wealth, were 
made of precious metals or jade, occasionally inlaid with gems. 

This rahl, of cast and chased bronze inlaid with turquoise, is embel- 
lished with pierced arabesques and calligraphic inscriptions in Naskhi script. 
Although most of the inscriptions are invocations to God and praises of 
Shi c ite imams, one of them reads, "During the time of the sultan of the 
time, Shah Sultan Husain Dinparvar [Protector of the Faith]." It seems likely 
that this object was commissioned by Sultan Husain II, who reigned at 
Ahmadnagar for only one year, in 1588-89. The working of the calligraphy 
and the style and material of the stand relate to metalwork from the Deccan. 

Ahmadnagar was one of the five Deccani sultanates that broke off from 
the Bahmanid kingdom during the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. 
In 1490, Malik Ahmad routed the Bahmanid army and established himself, 
with the title of Ahmad Nizam-Shah, as an independent ruler at Junnar, 
north of Poona. He later moved the Nizam-Shahi capital eastward to his 
new city of Ahmadnagar. In 1499, Ahmad strengthened his dominions by 
capturing the great fortress of Daulatabad. Although the Nizam-Shahi dy- 
nasty ruled until 1636, when its territories were finally annexed by Shah 
Jahan, decline had set in by the late sixteenth century. Following a brief but 
debauched reign, Husain Shah II, who was married to the sister of Sultan 
Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II of Bijapur, was imprisoned, blinded, and put to death 
(see also nos. 193-95). 



284 




285 



190 



190. 

THE SULTAN OF AHMADNAGAR, 
PROBABLY BURHAN AL-MULK II 
Inscribed, on the back: "Burhan Nizam al- 
Mulk ... the earliest work of the Deccan" 
Deccan, Ahmadnagar, late 16th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Miniature: 9 l A x 8 1 /* in. (23.5 x 20.5 cm.) 
Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, Cabinet des 
Manuscrits, Section Orientale. 
(Supp. Persan. 1572) 



Rounder than the bolster behind him, this Ahmadnagar prince, probably 
Burhan al-Mulk II (r. 1591-95), exemplifies good living and conveys an air 
of authority that extended at least as far as his kitchens. Pictorially, his 
massiveness seems weightless; and compared to contemporary figure paint- 
ings from the Mughal court, it lacks muscle. Although the picture delights 
the eye, its qualities lack the vital surge of Akbar's art. However rotund the 
forms, they arc scarcely palpable; and against the golden ground, Burhan's 
throne hovers in limbo, suggesting uneasily that if its occupant became flesh, 
bone, and blood, the thin gold legs would bend and snap. 



286 



Burhan al-Mulk II, whose name is inscribed on the back of this portrait, 
was the brother of Murtaza Nizam-Shah I of Ahmadnagar, who was more 
admirable for his patronage of the arts than for his statesmanship. The chroni- 
cles of Murtaza's reign wobble from rhapsodies on his judiciousness, wisdom, 
and generosity to poets and musicians to lurid accounts of episodes worthy 
of the Grand Guignol. The year 1588 brought horrific melodrama. Ill and 
deserted by his followers, Murtaza was locked in a hammam (bath) by his son, 
Prince Miran Husain, who ordered a fire built in the chamber below. The 
sultan was smoked to death — after which he was buried with full pomp. Prince 
Husain came to the throne at sixteen, and soon gained the reputation of an 
Elagabalus, achieving new heights of excess and dissoluteness. As a 
demonstration of loyalty the young sultan's vizier, Mirza Khan, put to death 
fifteen potential rivals before imprisoning the debauched youth in one of his 
own palaces — a prelude to his blinding and decapitation. 

Sultan Husain was replaced in 1589 by a twelve-year-old cousin, Burhan 
al-Mulk's son, Isma c il Nizam-Shah. Following further gory episodes, a new 
kingmaker, Kamal Khan, had taken charge; and Mirza Khan was paraded 
through the streets on assback before being cut into sections, which were 
mounted for public edification on Ahmadnagar's public buildings. 

In the meantime, Burhan al-Mulk waited in the wings, keen for power. 
In 1585, Burhan accepted an invitation to visit the Mughal court at Lahore, 
but aware of the Mughal emperor's scheme to use him as an imperial puppet 
in the Deccan, he turned down the offer of an army with which to seize 
Ahmadnagar. In 1591, at the Battle of Rohankhed, Burhan and his allies 
defeated the army of Jamal Khan. Burhan's son, the sultan, escaped from 
the field with the help of a court eunuch, who then left him stranded in a 
village. He was captured, brought to Burhan, given a paternal kiss on the 
forehead, forgiven — and packed off to prison in the fort of Bhakar. 

Finally, at the age of thirty-five, Burhan succeeded his own son. As 
sultan he reneged on his promises to Akbar, waged war against Bijapur, 
which had supported his rise to the throne, and exhausted himself in con- 
stant rounds of dissipation. In 1595, bedridden with dysentery, he chose 
another son, Ibrahim, as successor, a decision so repugnant to his son Ismail's 
faction that they gathered an army and attacked. Burhan rose to the occasion, 
leading his army against the rebels and roundly defeating them. But the 
effort was exhausting. Burhan al-Mulk II died on April 18, 1595. 

One of the very few surviving miniatures of the Ahmadnagar school, 
the Paris portrait bears traces of Mughal influence, in recollection of Burhan's 
visit to Lahore. The roseate palette, the soaring flyflappcr held by the attendant, 
the massive gold belts, and the rippling skirt edges are the work of a master. ' 

1. For a portrait of Burhan al-Mulk at the Mughal court in 1585, see: Schimmel and 
Welch, Ativan's Divan, p. 49. This miniature shows a younger Burhan (center, facing 
c Abkarhud), already stocky, accompanied by his entourage. It is folio 74a in the 
Darab-nama. 

Published: Blochet, Les Enluminures, pp. 153-54, pi. cix; Goetz, Geschichte der indischeti 
Miniaturmalerei, pi. 3; Barrett, Painting of the Deccan, pp. 14-15, pi. 5; Chaitanya, A 
History of Indian Painting, p. 86, fig. 4; Zebrowski, Deccan i Painting, pp. 19-23, figs. 4, 
6-9, pi." ii. 



Few Indian miniatures so pulsate with the energy of spring. Birds, lovers, 
and insects vibrate almost musically in this renowned painting, once part of 
a Ragamala (Garland of Melody) series. Indian music is improvised, ac- 
cording to prescribed rules, on classical musical modes, or ragas, each of 
which evokes a mood, or "colors" the mind with a certain emotion, and is 
meant to be performed during a particular season at a particular time of day. 
Poets gave verbal imagery to the melodies (see no. 211), and artists in turn 
interpreted them pictorially, improvising on predetermined compositions 
much as musicians created variations on the basic melodic themes. Ragamala 
paintings usually came in sets of thirty-six, representing the human situations 
associated with the thirty-six fundamental ragas and raginis ("wives of 
ragas," or subordinate modes). 

The styles and traditions for both musical improvisation and ragamala 



191. 

HINDOLA RAGINI 

From a Ragamala (Garland of Melody) series 
Deccan, Ahmadnagar, ca. 1590 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: UWh x T/h in. (26.4 x 20 cm.) 
Miniature: 9% x 7-Vh in. (24.5 X 18.7 cm.) 
National Museum, New Delhi 
(BKN-2066) 



287 



painting differed from region to region (see also no. 228). This illustration 
of Hindola Ragini, invariably depicted as a woman seated on a swing with 
her lover, was painted at Ahmadnagar in about 1590. Muslim rule in the 
Deccan was by then centuries old, but this remarkable composition, still 
close to pre-Muslim Deccani art, shows few traces of "foreign" idiom. 
Though it seems likely that this set of ragamala paintings was commis- 
sioned by an important Hindu family, the court at Ahmadnagar was so appre- 
ciative of indigenous traditions that the series could also have been painted 
for a royal patron. Chronicles of Ahmadnagar refer to marriages between 
Hindus and Muslims, as well as to the prominence of Hindus at court. 

The still life of spray guns at the lower right of the picture refers to 
Holi, the festival celebrating spring and fertility. To this day, the Holi satur- 
nalia marking the end of winter is a time when distinctions of class and caste 
are tossed aside and everyone — from prince to shopkeeper to cowherd — joins 
in the festivities, gleefully spraying each other with red coloring (once made 
from tessu blossoms). 

Published: The Art of India and Pakistan, p. 173, no. 804, pi. 142; Barrett, Painting o f 
the Deccan, pp. 12-13, pi. 4; Barrett and Gray, Painting of India, pp. 118, 121; Ebelmg, 
Ragamala Painting, p. 156, no. 9/6; Dahmcn-Dallapiccola, Ragamala-Miniatmen, p. 
264, no. 21.6; Chaitanya, A History of Indian Painting, p. 86, pi. vm (here called 
Vasanta Raga); Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, p. 40, fig. 26, pi. v. 





t ■ I • — 



Excavated near the Chini Mahal, in Bijapur, where quantities of broken 
Iranian and Chinese shards were found, this powerfully ornamental jali, with 
its sturdy arch and spiraling vines, infuses imported arabesques with an 
indigenous Indian intensity. Although no other Bijapuri iron jalis are known 
to have survived, its silhouette conforms to the vigorously inventive Bijapuri 
arabesques which adorn most of the city's superb monuments. Apparently, 
it was made by pouring melted iron into a mold of stone or sand, after 
which it was refined with files and abrasives. 

This jali has served for many years as a screen in All Saints Church, 
Bijapur, where it is mounted in a heavy wooden frame. 



192. 
JALI 

Deccan, Bijapur, late 16th or early 17th century 
Iron, 55 x 34 in. (139.7 x 86.4 cm.) 
All Saints Church, Bijapur 



Published: Cousens, Bijapur, p. 66, fig. 15. 



289 




193 



Round-faced, beak-nosed, not yet fully bearded, and exuding good will 
and confidence, Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II (r. 1580-1626) is seen at the age of 
seventeen or eighteen, when he was beginning to assert his statesmanly 
independence. Following the sordid murder of his uncle, Sultan c Ali c Adil- 
Shah I of Bijapur, he suddenly came to the throne at the age of nine. Although 
the issueless Sultan c Ali had groomed him as heir, his early years as sultan 
were dominated by firm and ambitious regents who probably encouraged 
his penchant for the arts in order to keep him from meddling in affairs of 
state. He was admired and protected by the late sultan's widow, Chand Bibi, 
a lady of great charismatic power who was revered by the people of Bijapur 
for her heroic stand against the Mughals. Although she returned permanently 
to her native Ahmadnagar when Ibrahim's sister married Prince Husain of 
Ahmadnagar in 1584, she had served Ibrahim devotedly and well during his 
vulnerable years. 

Few rulers possessed Sultan Ibrahim's engaging charm, which one senses 
through adolescent plumpness from his bright eyes and direct gaze, and 
from his betel-stained, smiling lips. A merry monarch, he glows with 
optimism, a justifiable mood. For Sultan Ibrahim inherited the throne of 
Bijapur at an auspicious time, prior to the Mughal campaigns later in the 
century. He and Malik Ambar of Ahmadnagar together were sufficiently 
powerful and diplomatically astute to protect the Deccan. Moreover, Sultan 



193. 

SULTAN IBRAHIM C ADIL-SHAH II OF 
BIJAPUR 

Deccan, Bijapur, ca. 1585-90 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 
10% x 6V2 in. (26.5 x 16.5 cm.) 
Private collection 




194 



Ibrahim's tolerant religious policies enabled him to maintain good relations 
with his predominantly Hindu subjects, who admiringly dubbed him Jagat 
Guru (Spiritual Leader of the World). 

Sultan Ibrahim was passionately devoted to the arts, especially music, 
and his aesthetic accomplishments rank with those of Akbar and Jahangir. 
His tomb and the adjoining mosque, the Ibrahim Rauza, are among India's 
greatest buildings, and we know of no unexceptional picture painted for 
him. In this portrait, each eyelash and jewel and twist of arabesque enhances 
the characterization. One senses Ibrahim's musicianship in the lyrical runs 
of flowering vines on his typically Bijapuri turban and in the matching 
pattern of his collar. Note, too, the trippingly paced calligraphy, in white, a 
truly melodic passage of Nasta c liq. 

Published: Gray, "Deccam Paintings," p. 75, pi. B; M. Chandra, "Portraits of Ibrahim 
Adil Shah," pi. i; Soustiel and David, Miniatures orientates, pp. 30-31, no. 25; Paintings 
from the Muslim Courts, p. 91, no. 176; Zebrowski, "Transformations," p. 171, fig. 
412; Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, p. 73, fig. 49, pi. vi. 



194. 

SULTAN IBRAHIM C ADIL-SHAH II 
RIDING ATASH KHAN 
Deccan, Bijapur, early 17th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 6 3 /4 X 5-V» in. (17.2 X 13.7 cm.) 
Miniature: 5'/2 X 3 3 A in. (14 X 9.5 cm.) 
The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



Sultan Ibrahim reveled equally in indoor and outdoor activities. Here, he 
rides his enormous elephant, Atash Khan, upon whom he so doted that he 
wrote verses about him in his book of songs, the Kitab-i Nauras (Book of 
Nine Sentiments). With legs resembling helium balloons, strawberry-pink 
mask and trunk festooned with jangling gold chains and bells, and wearing a 
rich blanket adorned with Ottoman tiger stripes, Atash Khan is no ordinary 
beast. Ibrahim's artist scanned the heights of fantasy and experimented with 
scale: blossoms are as big as human heads, deer are as large as men. Atash 
Khan looms like some great hill in a magician's landscape, dwarfing the sultan, 
his simian mahout, and the minuscule attendants. Beside him even his mate, 
Chanchal — who sadly was given under duress to Akbar in 1604 — seems 
runtish. But a few feet away, we come upon the trunk of a chanar tree 
which if painted in full would reach far beyond the picture and reduce the 
royal animal to midgetdom. 

Published: Zebrowski, "Transformations," p. 173, fig. 415; Zebrowski, Deccani Paint- 
ing, p. 96, figs. 71, 72 (det.). 



195. 

SULTAN IBRAHIM C ADIL-SHAH II IN A 

FANTASTIC LANDSCAPE 

Deccan, Bijapur, ca. 1610-15 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 6-Kt X 4 in. 

(17 X 10.2 cm.) 

Trustees of the British Museum, London 
(1937.4-10.02) 



Wherever Sultan Ibrahim stepped, flowers and leaves preened to the rhythms 
of his kartal (clapper) — or so it would appear from this superb portrait, in 
which, without appearing to be a clotheshorse or a fop, he stuns us with his 
magnificent gold shawl, pink britches cut in Portuguese style, and transpar- 
ent robe edged with embroidered arabesques. To Ibrahim, whose music, 
pictures, mosques, palaces, and tomb proclaim the perfection of his eye, 
even the designing and manufacture of a shoe was an event. Glimpsing his 
sultanly feet through the veil of his jama compares to viewing a mountainscape 
through windswept mist, or a waterfall through snow. 

Published: Gray, "Portraits from Bijapur," p. 184, pi. uiia; Gray, "Deccani Paintings," 
p. 77, pi. B; The Art of India and Pakistan, pp. 137, 139, fig. 149; Skelton, "Documents," 
pp. 117-18, fig. 5; Barrett and Gray, Painting of India, pp. 127-28; Paintings from the 
Muslim Courts, p. 91, no. 176; Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, p. 81, fig. 59, pi. vm. 



196. 

LADY FEEDING A BIRD 
Deccan, Bijapur, early 17th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 17Vh x 12 5 /h in. (44 x 32 cm.) 
Miniature: 12 5 /* X 8% in. (32 x 22.5 cm. 
Chester Beatty Library, Dublin 
(MS. 11A, no. 31) 



Fresh and original as it might seem, the artistic synthesis of Bijapur drew 
from many traditions: from Iran and Turkey; from other courts of Hindu 
and Muslim India, north and south; from Europe via the Portuguese and via 
the Mughals, through whom it also received elements from Tibet, Nepal, 
and Central Asia. China, too, is represented in Bijapur's amalgamation of 
styles, as is strongly apparent here. Far Eastern motifs arrived by various 
routes. The sensuously sprawling peonies with their liplike leaves and 
ornamentally broken spikes of foliage may have reached the Deccan directly, 
on imported textiles, ceramics, or gilded bronze vessels; or they may derive 
from Iranian variants on Chinese motifs, which were admired particularly at 



292 




195 




detail, 196 D> 



Tabriz in the fifteenth century and then transmitted from the Turkman court 
throughout the Islamic world. 

Like Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II (see nos. 193-95), the lady of this picture 
incorporates many moods. Her ash-hued skin and her topknot designate 
that she is a yogini, or female Hindu ascetic, a devotee frequently associated 
with the renunciation of all that is mundane. And yet, like many ascetics, 
she suffers worldliness. Her golden dopatta arcs gracefully in the breeze, the 
points of her chakdar jama (four-pointed skirt) reach out flirtatiously, and 
she is weighted down with gold necklaces, anklets, earrings, and bangles. 
Only the bird on her hand, which pecks at her mouth, amorous as a royal 
lover, can fathom the mystery of her smile. Who will accompany her to the 
otherworldly white palace in the hills? 

The verses around the painting were chosen with care and typify the 
amorous conceits of Muslim courts from Turkey through India from the 
fifteenth century onward. One of these ghazals coos that the beloved's curly 
black hair, disheveled by the morning breeze, is like hyacinths that perfume 
the air while, because tangled, it lends confusion. The dreamy vision of the 
beloved is ever in the lover's eye and heart; from continually reciting the 
beloved's name, his mouth is fragrant as a rosebud; and remembering her, 
his heart is radiant as the morning. The second four couplets further elabo- 
rate the image: those with spiritual insight dream of drinking from the foun- 
tain of the beloved's lips; and the ailing heart of the lover is never without 
the letters alif and dal, because the beloved's stature is straight as the former, 
her tresses curved as the latter. 

Published: Arnold, The Library oj A. Chester Beatty, vol. 1, pp. 49-50, vol. 3, pi. 
93, no. xxxi; Skclton, "The Mughal Artist Farrokh Beg," p. 399, pi. 8, fig. 16; 
Barrett, Painting of the Deccan, pp. 18-19, pi. 7; Chaitanya, A History of Indian Painting, 
fig. 65; Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, p. 103, fig. 82, pi. xn. 



197. 

A NOBLEMAN OF BIJAPUR 
Deccan, Bijapur, ca. 1615 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 6V4 X 4 in. 
(17.1 x 10.1 cm.) 

Trustees of the British Museum, London 
(1937.4-10.03) 



The rasas (flavors) of Bijapuri art range widely. This austerely aristocratic, 
sternly noble courtier, eagle-nosed and calm, stands firm as a mountain beneath 
a pair of gracefully hovering yellow and white birds. All is quiet. A graceful 
shawl flows soft as a waterfall from his shoulders, and the merest ripple 
enlivens the end of an understatedly sumptuous sash. But beneath the power- 
fully simple wrapping of his turban, behind his eye — Egyptian as Ikhnaton's 
— we sense expectation. Something is about to crack the silence; and the 
courtier's strong hands, as used to the sword as to the wine cup, will seek 
action. 



Published: Gray, "Deccani Paintings," p. 76, pi. A; Barrett and Gray, Painting of 
India, pp. 126, 128; Paintings from the Muslim Courts, p. 91, no. 174; Zebrowski, 
Deccani Painting, p. 81, figs. 55, 56. 



198. 

A FAT BEGUM 

Inscribed: "Hur Khanum Mughalani" 

(The Mughal Lady Hur) 

Deccan, Bijapur, ca. 1625 

Marbling, with touches of gold, silver, and 

opaque watercolor on paper, 9Vh X 5Yh in. 

(23.2x13.5 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.408) 



Although the portrayal is essentially a caricature, we can almost feel the 
dignified presence of this obese begum, a lady of high rank of some royal 
house, perhaps the royal harem of Bijapur. Her massive, rocklike body 
dominates the picture space, and her sharp, scanning eyes belie her plump, 
motherly visage. Resplendent with necklaces, a nose ring, tassels, prayer 
beads, scarves, and a plumed Chaghatai headdress, she sits holding a sprig 
of flowers delicately between thumb and forefinger. But it is the marbling 
on her clothing, the flowers, and the foreground that makes this miniature 
worthy of further study. Complete paintings produced by this highly com- 
plex process are very rare. 

Marbled paper was often used in India, Turkey, and Iran for book bindings 
and for decorating the borders of album pages. Its hypnotic effect was also 
used imaginatively in India as a background for elegant calligraphy on 
manuscript pages (see no. 214). Interest in the ancient art of marbling has 
been revived in recent years in Japan, Turkey, Pakistan, India, and the United 
States. 

The first recorded use of marbling in the Deccan is in the Kulliyat 



296 




198 



(Collected Works; Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabad), a book of poetry by 
Muhammad-Quli Qutb-Shah, the sultan of Golconda (r. 1580-1612), that 
was compiled sometime between 1590 and 1600. On one of the eight illustra- 
tions in Bukhara style that enrich the manuscript, the iridescent wings on 
some of the birds are actually pieces of marbled paper pasted onto the surface. 1 
Deccani artists seemed to have had a particular interest in creating entire 
paintings with marbling. At one time it was thought that the idea was im- 
ported to the Deccan from Turkey, but recent research has shown that mar- 
bled paper was then used in Turkey only for colorful book bindings and 
borders. 

Marbled paintings were a Bijapuri specialty. All of the known examples 
— no more than twenty-four including this one — were produced between 
about 1625 and 1650. 2 There must have been at least one artist or patron at 
Bijapur who was fascinated by the complicated process. Even some of the 
other paintings done at Bijapur during this twenty-five-year period have 
clouds painted with swirling patterns and colors that imitate marbling. One 
of the marbled paintings, Rustam Lassoing Wild Horses (National Museum, 
New Delhi), bears the name of the artist Shafi c . 3 

To create a painting as impressive as this portrait of a begum, the artist 
first chose an absorbent paper, which he treated with a mordant to insure 
better adhesion of the colors. He covered the areas to be left unadorned, in 
this case the unpaintcd background and the begum's hand, her head and 
throat, and all but part of her headdress, with a resistant gum. Using brushes 
or droppers, he then floated pigments mixed with ox gall on the surface of a 
vat of water mixed with size, a pasty substance that served to slow down the 
movement of the pigment, and swirled the colors with a stylus or comb to 
create his design. When he had the pattern he wanted, he placed his specially 
prepared sheet of paper directly in contact with the floating colors for a short 
time, then lifted it off and rinsed away any excess size. Finally, after the 
marbling had dried, the artist drew in the outlines, painted the solid areas of 
color and the shading on the face and hand, and heightened other details 
necessary for clarity with gold and a few deft strokes of color. 

J.M. 

1. For the manuscript, see: Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, p. 165, figs. 126-28. 

2. For other examples, sec: Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, pp. 135-38, figs. 102-6; 
Welch, Indian Drawings, p. 74, no. 34; Binney, Indian Miniature Painting, p. 153, 
no. 128, pp. 155-56, no. 129. 

3. Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, p. 138, no. 14. 

Published: Welch, Indian Drawings, p. 75, no. 35. 



Although none of the jeweled gold objects admired in Bijapuri paintings 
have been found, several bronze and copper vessels are known. Most are 
inscribed with Qur'anic verses in Naskhi script of such striking boldness 
and monumentality they resemble the stone-cut inscriptions on Bijapuri 
architecture. Forceful yet ornamental, with their repeated curves and uprights, 
they bring to mind Ottoman calligraphy and suggest that Turkish scribes were 
employed by the c Adil-Shahis. Although the inscriptions on the tomb and 
mosque of Sultan Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II are the high water mark of the art at 
Bijapur, excellent work was done until the c Adil-Shahi dynasty fell in 1686. 

Fanning out from a characteristically Bijapuri stylized flower, eight 
human-headed fish lend uniqueness to this dish, which can be dated to about 
1600, during the reign of Sultan Ibrahim. It was probably intended to serve 
offerings of food or flowers in the shrine of a Bijapuri saint. Related to it 
iconographically is a pair of large stone waterspouts in the Government 
Museum of Bijapur. Also human-headed, these gigantic fish — whose tongues, 
drilled and mounted on rods, undulated when water coursed through their 
mouths — once graced a building. The inscription, which for compositional 
reasons omits the last sentence of the famed Throne Verse (Sura 2:255), 
reads as follows: 



199. 

DISH WITH CALLIGRAPHIC INSCRIP- 
TION AND A WHORL OF FISH 
Deccan, Bijapur, ca. 1600 
Tinned copper, diameter lO-Kt in. (27.3 cm.) 
Fogg Art Museum, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, Purchase, Philip 
Hofer Fund for Islamic and Indian Art, the Fund 
for the Acquisition of Islamic Art, and the 
Discretionary Fund of the Islamic Department 
(1983.27) 



299 



1W 



Allah! There is no God save Him, the Living, the Sclf-subsistent. 
Neither slumber overtakes Him nor sleep. Unto Him belongs 
what is in the heavens and what is on earth. Who is it that 
intercedes with Him except with His permission? He knows 
what is before them and that which is behind them, and they 
do not encompass anything of His knowledge save what He 
will. His throne encompasses the heavens and the earth, and 
He wearies not of preserving them. [He is the Exalted, the 
Mighty.] 1 

1. The Quranic verses were identified and translated by Annemarie Schimmel. 

As he lay dying, Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II named his fifteen-year-old second 
son to succeed him as Sultan Muhammad c Adil-Shah (r. 1627-56). Sultan 
Muhammad inherited a state troubled by factions from within and by the 
threat of Mughal attack from without. Psychologically not unlike his chief 
persecutor, Shah Jahan, Muhammad retained his dignity and composure 
against terrible odds. In 1636, he was forced by the Mughal ambassador to 
enter a degrading alliance with the imperial power, a diplomatic defeat bal- 
anced by his successes in the South, where he won fealty and tribute from the 
rajas of the Carnatic kingdoms. 

Like Shah Jahan, Muhammad c Adil-Shah was an inspired patron, partic- 
ularly of painting and architecture. His tomb, the vast Gol Gumbaz (Round 
Dome), the largest domed structure in India, begun shortly after his accession, 
was not completed when he died thirty years later. The dramatic mihrab in 
Bijapur's Jami c Masjid (Great Mosque), also built during his reign, is adorned 
with calligraphies in gold and with trompe-l'oeil niches showing books, 
vases of flowers, and censers and chains. 

Portraits of Sultan Muhammad reflect his taste for a sumptuous yet hard- 
edged style richly embellished with gold and notable for its stately curves. 



300 



200. 

SULTAN MUHAMMAD 'ADIL-SHAH 
AND IKHLAS KHAN RIDE 
AN ELEPHANT 

Signed: "Haidar Ali, Ibrahim Khan, Bijapur" 

Deccan, Bijapur, ca. 1645 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 11 X \2 l A in. 

(28X31 cm.) 

Private collection 



Surviving examples combine great splendor with formality, qualities achieved 
by both his artists and Shah Jahan's portraitists. In this picture, he and his 
vizier, Ikhlas Khan, are shown riding a noble, splendidly caparisoned ele- 
phant that steps forward with firm and stately tread, propelled by undulating, 
swaying rhythms; the haloed sultan, ankus in hand, mans the animal with 
dignified authority. In their costumes, sparkling with tooled and burnished 
silver and gold, the two men continue the sartorial tradition notable in the 
portraits of Sultan Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II. Typical of Bijapuri painting are 
the rich deep reds and blues employed to suggest shadows within the creases 
of gold brocades. 

Sultan Muhammad became seriously ill in 1646; and until his death ten 
years later, he was barely able to rule. The begum Bari Sahiba, his senior 
wife, headed the regency in his stead. But it was during these years that 
the Maratha leader Shivaji gained strength; a major chapter of Indian history 
might have been altered had not the Bijapur sultan been incapacitated. 

Published: Paintings from the Muslim Courts, p. 92, no. 179; Zcbrowski, "Transforma- 
tions," p. 177, fig. 429; Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, pp. 131-32, fig. 100; Topsfield, 
An Introduction to Indian Court Painting, pp. 25-26, pi. 17. 




201. 

BRONZE LAMP 

Deccan, Bijapur, Gol Gumbaz, probably 
early 17th century 

Height without chain, 24Vh in. (63.2 cm.) 
Archaeological Museum, Bijapur 



Oil lamps by the thousands once brought soft, flickering light and lively 
shadows to nocturnal Bijapur. Made from hammered and cut sheets of metal, 
this lamp, from the Gol Gumbaz, is so architectonic in design that it brings 
to mind seventeenth-century Bijapun buildings. Polygonal panels with ara- 
besque and geometric ornament are divided by narrow flanges decorated in 
silhouette with particularly appealing animal heads, characteristic of Bijapuri 
inventiveness and wit. Light in weight, it would have swung from the chain 
on which it was suspended, scattering beams of light. 




302 



"Khanjar" is an Arabic word used in the Islamic countries for different 
weapons. In Persia and India the name is applied to a dagger with a double- 
edged, slightly recurved blade and, usually, a pistol-grip hilt made from 
metal, ivory, or jade or some other hardstone. Jade hilts may be plain, carved, 
or set with jewels; fewer khanjars were made with ivory hilts, and they 
generally have a simple shape. Khanjars were commonly used in India from 
about 1600. Daggers with hilts of gold, silver, jade, or ivory were worn at 
court or in ceremonies, not carried on the battlefield. The hilt of this khanjar 
is so well rubbed that it must have been used often, perhaps by an official 
attending the court. 

This dagger is a unique example of an ivory-hilted khanjar. The finely 
wrought watered steel blade is ribbed and has a slight double curve. The hilt 
is embellished with an exquisite allover arabesque pattern of minutely drawn 
flowers and foliage carved in low relief against a dark brown stained ground. 
The same floral ornament, derived from the standard Persian type, was used 
for both Mughal patrons and the contemporary Deccani sultans, but the 
feeling and general appearance differed. Our piece seems to be Deccani, 
more than likely from Bijapur. 



J.M. 



202. 

KHANJAR 

Deccan, probably Bijapur, early 17th century 
Steel with ivory hilt, length H 5 /* in. (37 cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.1527) 



Published: The Indian Heritage, pp. 130-31, no. 419. 



It is a paradox that things endowed with the power to hurt or kill are often 
exceedingly beautiful. Daggers, knives, swords, maces, arrows, and other 
weapons seen here, for example, are elegantly shaped and lavishly adorned 
either by their makers or according to the fancy of rich, opulence-loving 
patrons. Most such arms were meant to be used as weapons; others, like this 
elephant goad, were made for ceremonial use, or to herald their owners' 
power. It is therefore baffling to learn that this ankus was made not for a 
monarch but for a Sufi saint. 

The ankus is remarkably crafted and well proportioned: the octagonal 



203. 

ANKUS 

Inscribed with QuPanic verses and the name 

of Shah Amin ad-Din A c la 

Deccan, Bijapur, ca. 1625-40 

Steel, length 33'/x in. (84 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 

Art, Hyderabad (76.1530) 



203 



shaft tapers from a domical, faceted knob at one end to the two pointed 
blades, or hooks, at the other. In the compartments created by the rm, 
moldings along the shaft's length, a series of Qur'anic verses in Thuluth 
script is chiseled m low relief. In the lobed cartouches on both sides of the 
ornamental plate that reinforces the curved blade, the inscription reads- "Allah 
Muhammad, c Ali, Shah Amin ad-Din A c la " ' 

r , f h \ h i~ Dm A ' h (1597-1675) was a prominent descendant of the 

Chishti Suh family who had their hospice on Shahpur Hillock at Biiapur 
Several works ,n the Dakhni language have been attributed to him, but little 
is known of his activities during the first half of the seventeenth century 
when this ankus was made. Some of Amin ad-Din's teachings, such as his 
protest against the idea that the mosque was the exclusive house of God 
were merely unconventional. Others were more extreme. Amin ad-Din A'la 
claimed to have achieved union with God, and both manuscript and epi- 
graph^ sources suggest that his followers believed in the lofty spiritual sta- 
tus of their pir (teacher of the Sufi way). Accommodating toward Muslims 
and non-Muslims a ike, the cult that coalesced around his figure consisted of 
at least a dozen khalifas (disciples who may induct others into the order) and 
numerous munds (pupils). There seem to have been especially close ties 
between Shahpur Hillock and the Kannada-speakmg Hindu Lingayat popu- 



304 



lation of the region; one of Amm ad-Din's foremost khalifas was a man 
named Qadir Linga, who had been a cavalryman in the Bijapur service. 
Even today, both Muslims and Hindus assemble in large numbers at Shah 
Amin ad-Din A c la's shrine on the anniversary of his death to commemorate 
his c urs (marriage) with God. The ceremony is one of the major events in 
Bijapur. 1 

The question of who commissioned this ankus and had it regally in- 
scribed with the saint's name is problematic. Shah Amin ad-Din A c la had no 
contact with the courts of Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II and his son Muhammad 
c Adil-Shah at Bijapur. But in spite of Amin ad-Din's detached attitude to 
the court, one of them could have offered him the ankus, for both sultans 
made visits to Sufi hospices to seek spiritual counseling. A second possibil- 
ity is that one of Amin ad-Din's murids was a master armorer who made the 
ankus as an offering to his revered pir. When the saint might have used the 
ankus is also difficult to determine. Shah Amin ad-Din A c la's name is in- 
scribed on the basket hilt of a steel sword covered with calligraphic 
embellishment that is now in a private collection in Hyderabad, and the Gol 
Gumbaz Museum in Bijapur has a more or less similar ankus, also with 
Qur'anic inscriptions, in its collection. The sword and both elephant goads 
could have been carried in ceremonial processions, but it is not known whether 
this was Sufi practice. 

J.M. 

1. The information on Amin ad-Din A c la's life is based on Eaton, Sufis of Bijapur. 

Published: Bilgrami, Landmarks of the Deccan, p. 62; The Indian Heritage, 
pp. 136-37, no. 448. (Because the last name in the inscription was misread as 
C AH instead of A c la, the ankus is incorrectly attributed to the early eigh- 
teenth century; the entry reads: "This probably refers to the sufi shaikh Sayid 
Shah Amin ud-Din c Ali Husaini who died in 1150 ah/ 1737-8 ad.") 



This alarming but handsomely sculptural forged steel weapon was de- 
signed to thrust fore and aft. As is clear from the carefully replicated shape 
of antelope horns, it was based upon primitive, probably tribal, prototypes, 
which initially were made from natural materials to which steel tips were 
added at a later stage of the evolution. Some examples were made with a 
shield over the grip to protect the hand. 

Such weapons are associated with the Marathas — a hardy, warlike peo- 
ple descended in part from the Huns and Scythians — whose greatest leader 
was Shivaji (1627-1680), noted for his struggle against Aurangzeb. The 
Marathas gained renown as mercenaries in the employ of the Dcccani sultans. 
From Malik Ambar, the Abyssinian chief minister of Ahmadnagar, they 
learned guerrilla warfare, which they mastered so proficiently that Maratha 
power soon spread through most of northern India. On the death of Shivaji, 



204. 

STEEL WEAPON IN THE FORM OF 
ANTELOPE HORNS 
Maharashtra, 17th century 
Length 33 in. (83.8 cm.) 
Private collection 



204 



305 



his son Sambhuji seized control. Detested by the Mughals for his cruelty, 
lechery, and addiction to wine, he was also feared by them. When eventually 
they captured and executed him, Aurangzeb arranged to educate his son, 
later known as Shivaji II, at court, an experience that so softened him that he 
became unfit to govern. Maratha rule then fell into the hands of the Peshwas 
(prime ministers), who soon assumed hereditary leadership. Within seven 
years of Aurangzeb's death in 1707, Maratha energy, ambition, and military 
skill enabled them to enter into an alliance with the Mughals, sharing with 
them the revenues of the northeastern provinces, in addition to controlling 
the territories already in their hands. In 1761, however, at the third Battle of 
Panipat, a huge army led by the Afghan ruler Ahmad Shah Durrani inflicted 
a major defeat upon the Marathas, from which they never fully recovered. 




205. 

C ALI C ADIL-SHAH II SLAYS A TIGER 
Deccan, Bijapur, ca. 1660 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: \m x 15 in. (29.9 x 38.1 cm.) 
Miniature: 8V2 X W/a in. (21.6 X 31.1 cm. 
The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



Like his father and grandfather, c Ali c Adil-Shah II was concerned as much 
with art and literature as with statecraft and like them he aspired to create 
for himself the greatest of all Bijapuri tombs. But at his death, it was far less 
finished than his father's had been; and with its seemingly gothic arches 
open to the air, it now resembles a romantic ruin as painted by Caspar David 
Friedrich. Sultan c Ali's reign was beset with tribulations. When he inherited 
the throne at the age of fifteen or eighteen in 1657, his succession was de- 
clared invalid by Emperor Aurangzeb, on the awkwardly personal grounds 
of illegitimacy. c Ali's life was further soured by Shivaji and his Marathas, 
who formed an alliance against him with his erstwhile friend, the Mughal 
general Mirza Raja Jai Singh of Amber (see no. 233). Further struggles seemed 
futile. In 1666, Sultan c Ali withdrew into the pleasurable insulation of his 
harem and the oblivion of wine. In 1672, he died of stress and calculated joy. 
He was succeeded by his son, Iskandar c Adil-Shah, the last of the c Adil- 
Shahi sultans of Bijapur. 



306 



As if in a glittering tableau vivant, Sultan c Ali, resplendently dressed in 
gold, orange, and blue, smiles victoriously in his portrayal as a tiger hunter. 
The likeness is intensely Indian, bringing to mind gold coins of the Gupta 
dynasty in which deified heroes slay evil in the form of lions. His lips are 
stained red from chewing betel nut (pan), and his eyes are shaped like pipal 
leaves as he speeds a well-aimed royal shaft into the vitals of a beastly force 
of darkness — an inadequate surrogate for the encroaching enemy. The wicked 
tiger snarls from a rocky outcropping in which the artist has hidden amusingly 
dastardly grotesques. This heart of a miniature, the corners and lower sec- 
tion of which are missing, once included c Ali's royal barge, of which only 
two finials remain. It was painted by the same hand as several wall paintings 
— large bouquets of flowers in splendid vases adorned with gold and lapis 
lazuli arabesques — in the Athar Mahal (Palace of Relics) . 1 Despite the frustra- 
tion of ruling a doomed state, Sultan c Ali was an important and inventive 
patron. 

1. For the wall paintings, see: Cousens, Bijapur, pi. LXXVH. 
Published: Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, p. 140, fig. 110. 



Restrained, dignified, marvelously inscribed architectural reliefs abound 
in Bijapur. This relief from the Athar Mahal (Palace of Relics), with its bold 
Nasta c liq characters, demonstrates that artistic quality remained high virtu- 
ally until the fall of the c Adil-Shahi dynasty. Were it not dated, one would be 
tempted to assign this piece, on the basis of the style of the arabesques, to a 
considerably earlier date. 1 

1. For another panel from the same mosque, see: In the Image of Man, p. 97, no. 11. 
Published: Frederic, Indian Temples and Sculpture, fig. 381. 



206. 

ARCHITECTURAL INSCRIPTION 

Inscribed: "A fountain from Paradise" 
Deccan, Bijapur, dated a.h. 1082 (1671-72) 
Basalt, 16 3 /8 x 24 5 A x 8 5 /s in. (41.5 x 62.5 x 
22 cm.) 

Archaeological Museum, Bijapur (2) 



206 




207 



207. 

PRINCELY DEER HUNTERS 
Deccan, Bijapur, ca. 1680 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 9Vi X 18 in. 
(24.1 X 45.7 cm.) 

The Kncllington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



No mere hunting scene, this picture — one of the last painted for the c Adil- 
Shahis — contrasts the static with the kinetic, tranquillity with violence, and 
invites allegorical interpretation. Against a hide-and-seek of clouds, reminis- 
cent of the sky in Altdorfer's Battle of Alexander (Alte Pinakothek, Munich), 
a golden sunset caresses a softly feminine landscape — a stretch of hips, belly, 
and breasts, fringed by silhouetted trees. But the primary subject is two 
princes and a pack of hounds chasing deer. The older prince, immobile as an 
equestrian statue, rocks backward, amplifying the momentum of the active 
younger prince, who hurtles forward. We hear the golden bells of his horse's 
mane jingle, as to the right deer scramble to escape the crushing jaws of the 



308 




fierce hounds. From the left a squad of huntsmen approaches, to attend to 
the kill. 

On the horizon at the left is a typical Bijapuri palace, and the landscape 
recalls the rolling hills of the c Adil-Shahis' hunting grounds. It is tempting 
to suppose that the younger prince is Sultan Iskandar himself, the last of the 
c Adil-Shahi line (see no. 208), enjoying a final outing before his kingdom 
fell to Mughal hands. 

Published: Blochet, Collection Jean Pozzi, pi. l; Welch, A Flower from Every Meadow, 
pp. 130-31, no. 78; Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, pp. 144, 147, figs. 115, 116. 



309 



208. 

THE HOUSE OF BIJAPUR 

Inscribed: "work of Kamal Muhammad and 

Chand Muhammad" 

Deccan, Bijapur, ca. 1680 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 16 1 A X \2 l A in. 

(41.3X31.1 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
Purchase, Gifts in memory of Richard 
Ettinghausen; Schimmel Foundation, Inc., 
Ehsan Yarshater, Karekin Beshir Ltd., Margaret 
Mushekian, Mr. and Mrs. Edward Ablat and 
Mr. and Mrs. Jerome A. Straka Gifts; The 
Friends of the Islamic Department Fund, Louis 
E. and Theresa S. Seley Purchase Fund for 
Islamic Art, Rogers Fund, and gifts and funds 
from various donors, by exchange (1982.213) 



Bijapuri painting neared the end with a flourish in this miniature which 
both sums up the dynasty politically and harks back stylistically to the glory 
of Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II. Apparently a famous subject, of which several 
later versions are known, this large miniature was painted for the last Bijapur 
sultan, Iskandar c Adil-Shah, who came to the throne when he was four 
years old after his father's early death in 1672. He grew up under the control 
of a succession of squabbling regents, always threatened by the Mughals 
and the Marathas. Brave, determined, and precocious, he took over the reins 
of government while very young, and cleverly pitted his enemies one against 
the other. But on the death in 1680 of his fickle ally, the Maratha leader 
Shivaji, the cause of Bijapur became hopeless. In 1686 the eighteen-year-old 
sultan was captured by the Mughals, who annexed Bijapur. Iskandar's last 
fourteen years were spent imprisoned in Daulatabad Fort. After his death his 
corpse was returned to Bijapur, where he was remembered with tearful 
reverence. He was buried tombless in a garden — now a public park — beneath 
a simple cenotaph. 

In this group portrait of the house of Bijapur, showing the dynasty 
from beginning to end, Iskandar is the dark-skinned twelve-year-old boy at 
the right, seated beside his father, Sultan c Ali. In this painted curtain call, 
all of Iskandar's line are reassembled, nobly and characteristically attired 
and enthroned on a magnificent floral carpet. On the horizon, beyond the 
landscape painted in the style of 1590, the Arabian Sea reminds us that proud, 
dismembered Bijapur once included Goa. 1 

1. For later versions of this picture, sec: Taylor, Architecture at Beejapore, frontispiece; 
Strzygowski, Kramrisch, and Wellesz, Asiatische Miniaturmalerei, p. 42, fig. 37, pi. 
13; Manucci, Storia do Mogor, vol. 3, pi. xxxiv. 

Published: Nouveau Drouot-Salle, Paris, June 24, 1982, lot 67; Notable Acquisitions 
1982-1983, pp. 12, 14-15; Zcbrowski, Deccani Painting, pp. 150-51, no. 118a, pi. xvn. 



209. 

CIRCULAR SALVER 
Deccan, probably Golconda, ca. 1600 
Copper, chased and engraved, with traces of 
gilding, diameter 23% in. (60.5 cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.1442) 



This magnificent copper salver is a rare survival of Indian Islamic metalware. 
In fact, it is the only Indian example of its kind. A Shi c ite inscription in 
elegant Naskhi script encircles the hamsa (sacred goose) set amid floral 
ornament in the central medallion. Superbly executed birds and beasts, both 
real and fanciful, hunt and fight in the broad outer band against an animated 
arabesque of floral motifs, and the cavetto and flattened rim are decorated 
with scrolling, intertwined stems. Most of the salver's original gilding has 
disappeared, perhaps from regular use. The quality and style of the design 
suggest that this masterpiece is a product of a Qutb-Shahi karkana (royal 
workshop) at Golconda, probably from about 1600. 

The recent interest of scholars in the history, society, literature, and art 
of the Muslim kingdoms of the Deccan has led art historians to accept the 
existence of a distinct Deccani style in metalwork that, like Deccani painting, 
achieved its own unique character. For centuries before this salver was made, 
the Deccan had a tradition for metalwork. Deccani craftsmen produced objects 
not only for the innumerable temples in the region but for the courts of the 
Kakatiya, western Chalukya, and Hoysala kings. From the fourteenth to the 
seventeenth century, the Muslim states of the Deccan established economic 
and cultural ties with Iran, Arabia, and Turkey, but though Deccani art adopted 
certain of the artistic conventions of those countries, the artists and craftsmen 
of this plateau region of southern India had a different vision. Their cre- 
ations are intimate and seem effortless. Although the resources of the Deccani 
sultans were humbler than those of the Mughals, some of these rulers were 
highly cultivated men who generously supported artistic endeavors. 

Very little Mughal metalware of the sixteenth and seventeenth centu- 
ries has survived, and Deccani examples are even rarer. Most of the known 
examples are tinned copper objects produced for religious purposes, with 
finely proportioned bodies and meticulously engraved and chiseled — almost 
Safavid — floral arabesques and calligraphic inscriptions in Thuluth script. 
The only piece of Indian Islamic metalware comparable to our salver is a 
large Mughal wine bowl dating to the first quarter of the seventeenth cen- 
tury (no. 119). The decoration on the bowl, hunting scenes of horse and 



310 




208 




209 



elephant riders in a landscape filled with floral arabesques, was evidently 
designed by a Mughal painter. Scholars have now come to believe that the 
designs on several of the decorative art objects used by the Mughals were 
created by court painters rather than by the craftsmen who executed the 
pieces. 1 This exquisite salver must also have been designed by an artist of 
great ability for a discerning patron, who then had it executed by a master 
craftsman in his karkana. The design reminds us of the drawing of an "in- 
habited arabesque" (no. 210), which we have also attributed to about 1600. 

The shape and general decorative scheme of the Mughal wine bowl to 
some extent follow Western Iranian tradition. Although certain details of 
the chased and engraved decoration on our salver are characteristic of Timurid 
and Safavid Iran, in its totality it is more Indian. The hamsa at the center is a 
common southern Indian, particularly Hindu, ornament, and the drawing is 
typically Deccani. Also Deccani in character is the inscription in the band 
surrounding the medallion, a Shi c ite version of the Kalima (the Muslim pro- 
fession of faith) and the phrase "nasrun min Allah wa fathun qar[ib]" (Help 
from God and near victory; Sura 61:13). The inscription is written in cur- 
sive Naskhi script against scrolling floriates, and a narrow band of floral 
ornament with undulating stems surrounds it. Annemarie Schimmel has 
pointed out certain errors in the inscription that show it was executed by 
someone who did not know Arabic. 2 The mistakes in the inscription, the 
inclusion of a hamsa and yalis (mythical lions, also Hindu symbols), and the 
style of the drawing of some of the other animals lead us to suspect that the 
salver was executed by a local Hindu craftsman. But this is mere conjecture. 
The artisan could as easily have been a highly skilled but less than literate 
Muslim, and hamsas and yalis were part of the prevailing regional design 
tradition. 

The richness and energy of the imaginatively conceived, action-filled 
decoration in the broad outer band confirm the salver's Deccani origin. Tigers, 
yalis, deer, a cow with a calf, bulls, horses, elephants, camels, dogs, cats, 
rabbits, peacocks, ducks, cranes, simurghs, griffins, and dragons engage in 
violent combat or run about playfully. The elephants, yalis, and bulls are 
drawn in a manner that is particularly Deccani. 

The dramatic interplay of spirited animals, birds, and floral ornament, 
subtly deployed and harmoniously integrated, also gives the work an overall 
sense of order, clarity, and balance. The charm of the design is enhanced by 
the equally meticulous and sensitive execution. This salver is a key piece in 
the history of metalware in Islamic India and will remain so even when 
comparable examples are discovered. 

J.M. 

1. Mittal, forthcoming. 

2. Personal communication, October 1982. 

Published: The Indian Heritage, p. 145, no. 491; Mittal, "Indo-Islamic Metal and 
Glassware," p. 63, fig. 1 (det.). 



The Muslim sultans who ruled in the Deccan during the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries, like the Bahmanid dynasty they succeeded, maintained 
close relations with Iran. The cultural, religious, and political ties between 
Iran and the Qutb-Shahi sultanate of Golconda were especially strong, not 
only because the founder of the dynasty had originally come from Iran but 
because the Golconda sultans, like the rulers of Iran, were Shi c ites. A number 
of Iranian theologians, soldiers, traders, and men proficient in the arts found 
patronage and a welcome abode at the Golconda court. 

As does most Golconda art of the Qutb-Shahi period, this floral ara- 
besque alive with mythical birds and beasts owes an undeniable debt to Persian 
traditions. Iranian designers also drew fantastic dragons, birds, and fish amid 
entwined tendrils and flowering stems, but this Deccani artist's extravagant 
creatures seem charged with special intensity. As usual, though the design 
may be borrowed, the interpretation is unmistakably Indian. 

J.M. 

Published: Welch, Indian Drawings, p. 67, no. 28. 




210 



210. 

AN INHABITED ARABESQUE 

Deccan, Golconda, ca. 1590 

Reddish black line and touches of white on 

paper, 4 5 /s X 2V 2 in. (11.6 X 6.5 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 

Art, Hyderabad (76.588) 



< 209, detail 



313 



211. 

SONG FROM AN ILLUMINATED 
DAKHNI MANUSCRIPT IN NASTATJQ 
SCRIPT 

Deccan, Golconda or Bijapur, ca. 1625-35 
Black ink, gold, and opaque watercolor on 
paper, 5% x 3Vi in. (14.2 X 8.8 cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.1540) 






211 



This calligraphy panel may be the opening page of a manuscript of poems 
composed by c Abdullah Qutb-Shah, ruler of the Deccani kingdom of 
Golconda from 1626 to 1672. Although in the political sphere 'Abdullah's 
reign witnessed the waning of Qutb-Shahi power, in the field of literature it 
was a period of remarkable achievement, especially in the vernacular language, 
Dakhni. Several of the masterpieces of Dakhni literature, such as Wajhi's 
allegorical tale the Sabras (The Senses), Ghawwasi's Saifu^l-Muluk, and Ibn 
Nishati's Phulban (The Gardener), were written under c Abdullah's patronage, 
and the sultan himself was an accomplished poet in Dakhni, combining his 
poetic skill with a knowledge of North Indian (Hindustani) classical music. 
Only a meager portion of his total literary output survives, in a unique but 
incomplete manuscript housed in the Salar Jang Museum in Hyderabad. 1 

The Dakhni song inscribed in Nasta c liq script on this folio does not 
appear in the Salar Jang manuscript. The heading above the text, "dar maqam-i 
malhar" (in the Malar mode), indicates the song's musical mode, or raga 
(see also nos. 191, 269). In the subcontinent, raga Malar is traditionally 
associated with the rainy season and with rejoicing. The Hindustani idiom 
"malar gana," literally "to sing the raga Malar," is sometimes used simply 
to mean "to be merry." 

In view of the obscurities of both script and language, we can propose 
only a rough translation of the poem: 

Come, friends, let us go and arouse . . . 

The rain clouds of the mountains. 

Let us adorn every tray with gems; 

Let us spread garlands of pearls around our necks; 

Let us make the devotee and dancer dance; 

Let us make them drink wine and let us give them 

a taste of fun; 
Let us sing the song Malar; 

c Abdullah Shah, for the sake of the Prophet, brings 
the rain. 

The main charm of the page lies in the minute, lively decoration be- 
tween and around the lines of calligraphy. The text of the poem, in two 
columns separated by a narrow gray band with a floral design, and the heading 
at the top of the page are written in elegant black Nasta c liq script against 
unpainted rolling cloud forms contained by thin black lines. The second 
caption, in a rectangular frame with a green border, is written in red against 
a gold cartouche with arabesques on either side on a gray ground. The rest 
of the decoration is painted mainly in black ink and two shades of gold on a 
gold ground; there are buildings in the rocky landscape that surrounds the 
caption in the top panel, and in the landscape of the two vertical panels a lion 
and a tiger hunt deer and cows graze in undulating pastures. 

This folio is almost identical in style and richness of embellishment to 
the Kitab-i Nauras (Book of Nine Sentiments), a well-known collection of 
Dakhni songs based on North Indian classical ragas composed by Ibrahim 
c Adil-Shah II of the neighboring state of Bijapur and transcribed in 1618 by 
the court calligrapher, Mir Khalilullah Butshikan. It is possible that c Abdul- 
lah Qutb-Shah followed his example and had his poetry equally lavishly 
illuminated. The name 'Abdullah Shah in the last line of the poem could, 
however, also refer to Shah Shaikh 'Abdullah 'Aidarus, the Sufi who mirac- 
ulously cured Ibrahim in the 1620s and was hence greatly revered by the 
sultan and made his adviser. If that is so, the page may come from another 
manuscript by Ibrahim, perhaps also transcribed by Khalilullah, that is now 
lost. Whether it is from Golconda or Bijapur, this folio, like those from the 
Kitab-i Nauras, amply establishes the unique quality of the royal Deccani 
book pages. 

J.M. 

1. For the manuscript, see: Muhammad, Divan-i ^Abdullah Qutb-Shah. 

Ali Asani has made important contributions to this entry and translated the poem. 



314 




Much of seventeenth-century India converges in this kalamkan (literally, 
worked with a pen), a delightful painted cotton strongly influenced by the 
art of Golconda, whose sway extended to the centers of textile manufacture 
on the Coromandel Coast. Contained in its theatrically flat facade is a visual 
fruitcake of motifs — Indian, Iranian, and European, Hindu, Muslim, and 
Christian — pleasing to every sort of taste, salable to anyone from a Gol- 
conda or Safavid nobleman to a rich Hindu merchant or European factor. 



212. 

KALAMKARI 

Madras region, perhaps Pulicat, ca. 1640-50 
Cotton, resist dyed, 8 ft. 3 ! /2 in. X 6 ft. 5 in. 
(2.53 x 1.96 m.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
Gift of Mrs. Albert Blum (20.79) 



315 



During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, makers of traditional kal- 
amkaris adjusted to European customers, who wanted bedspreads, bed cur- 
tains, and yard goods for their rapidly expanding markets. These extended 
as far as America, where many colonial houses boasted spritely patterns 
made by Indian artisans. 

In the center, proud and happy parents admire their curly-haired babe, 
whose pose recalls that of the infant Krishna crawling as butter thief. The 
mother is richly jeweled, and her mustachioed husband seems to be a Mus- 
lim of high degree, even though his jama is tied in the Hindu way, under the 
left shoulder. Most of the other Indian gentlemen are Muslim, and several 
are dressed in Safavid style. Whether enthroned, hunting, riding in a bullock 
cart, on horseback, performing music, arguing, gossiping, drinking, or just 
milling about, they are almost as decorative as the ladies, who range from 
the mother to a yogini, from a musician to the refined and sumptuously 
dressed trio. Resembling the Three Graces out for a stroll, they seem des- 
tined to meet the gentleman of similar scale who waits at the right, his arm 
casually resting on his typically Deccani straight-bladed sword. Everyone in 
the picture is engulfed by flowers, blossoming in every nook and cranny and 
strung into the garlands that dangle from every cornice. Between the par- 
ents and the trio of ladies is a row of coffers, vases, bowls, cups, a crutch, 
and a walking stick, superbly adorned with dots, dashes, curlicues, and 
arabesques. 



The courtier at the right is balanced by two Europeans, probably traced 
from prints: a wide-eyed gallant on a rearing horse, and, below, a down-in- 
the-mouth traveler or merchant leaning against an Indian bolster. Except for 
him, every personage, bird, deer, horse, and bullock exudes cheerfulness. 
Down to the last squiggle of flower, crockery, or molding on the gimcrack 
fagade, drawing and coloring flowed mellifluously at the hand of this anon- 
ymous but accomplished painter, who had sampled the world's artistic mo- 
tifs and chosen some as his own. 

This magnificent hanging — along with a companion piece in the Victo- 
ria and Albert Museum, London 1 — was not expected to outlast a few years 
of use; but its artist, and his family of fellow craftsmen, never stinted in 
following the many complicated ideas and procedures that went into its 
manufacture, an entire science of mordants and dyes, infinite numbers of 
washings, dryings in the air, masking out of areas not to be colored, and of 
course the exuberant act of drawing. 

1. For the companion piece, which has identical floral borders, see: Gittingcr, Master 
Dyers, pp. 112-13, no. 103. 

Published: Morris, "An Indian Hanging," pp. 143, 149-52; Clousoz and Morris, 
Painted and Printed Fabrics, pi. in; Irwin, "Golconda Cotton Paintings," p. 38, fig. 5, 
pi. v; Irwin and Brett, Origins of Chintz, fig. 2. 



The shape of this armguard, called a dastana or bazuband, is typical of 
those used in the Deccan and southern India from the sixteenth to the eigh- 
teenth century. Both plates have a transverse elliptical rib at the wrist. The 
long plate, curved out at the top to accommodate the elbow, protected the 
outer forearm, and the shorter plate guarded the inside of the wrist. A gauntlet, 
probably mail, attached to the main plate would have covered the hand. 
Steel pins through the hinges, which are also steel and were originally silver 
plated, held the two plates together around the arm. An Indian soldier often 
wore only one vambrace, on his sword hand if he was on foot and carrying 
a shield, on his bridle hand if on horseback or, we presume, riding an elephant. 

Most Indian armguards arc made of steel. Some are plain; some are 
embellished with chased patterns or koftgari work (gold or silver inlay). Cal- 
ligraphy is sometimes introduced into designs of floral motifs and arabesques, 
but this is the only armguard we know of where the entire surface has been 
covered with openwork calligraphy and engraved ornamentation. The 
calligraphy, exceptionally well-written Thuluth script, has been brilliantly 
executed in thick copper sheet. On the long plate, the ninety-nine names of 
the Prophet Muhammad and invocations to him are arranged in four rows 
on either side of the central rib, and the narrow band at the wrist contains 
another openwork inscription. An arched cartouche above the wrist, incor- 
porating the transverse rib, encloses openwork and engraved floral decoration. 
The short plate has similar floral ornament in two panels separated by a 
plant motif and framed by a band of script in openwork, part of the Throne 
Verse (Sura 2:255) from the Qur'an. The edges of the plates are enriched and 
reinforced by narrow borders decorated with engraved trefoils. Few crafts- 
men would even attempt a project as exacting and time-consuming as this. 

Such superb workmanship is rarely encountered on armor made for 
defense rather than purely for show, and we might at first think this vam- 
brace was a ceremonial accessory for a king. But because the ornate copper 
overlay is supported from inside by a steel plate, we believe the armguard 
may indeed have been worn on the battlefield — by a king who was not 
actually fighting but directing his army from his scat atop an armored elephant. 
Armor inscribed with passages from the Qur 5 an provided the wearer with 
not only physical but talismanic protection and assured his victory. 



213. 

VAMBRACE 

Deccan, Golconda, ca. 1650-60 

Steel with gilded copper overlay, 

length 13 7 /« in. (35.2 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 

Art, Hyderabad (76.1526) 



J.M. 




Published: The Indian Heritage, p. 137, no. 453. 



213 



317 



214. 

ALBUM PAGE WITH VERSES IN 

NASTA C LIQ SCRIPT 

Inscribed: "Faqir c Arab" 

Deccan, Golconda, ca. 1625-35 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 6 7 /h X 4 in. 

(17.6X10 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.1541) 



Two Persian verses in praise of eyebrows are written diagonally across this 
album page on paper marbled in orange and green (see no. 198). Gold ara- 
besques with touches of blue embellish the spaces between the lines of 
calligraphy, and floral arabesques are painted in colors on a lapis lazuli ground 
in the top right and bottom left corners. The graceful Nasta c liq script, the 
matching curves of the sword-shaped arabesques, and the pattern of the 
marbled paper all convey the varying moods expressed by the changing 
shapes of eyebrows, echoing, in an abstract way, the words of the poem. 

The cloud of marbling in the lower left corner contains the calligra- 
pher's name, Faqir c Arab. Mulla c Arab Shirazi originally came from Shiraz, 
in Iran. It is said that he was not only well versed in ornamental writings and 
inscriptions but could write more than a thousand couplets a day. He was 
one of the expert calligraphers appointed by Sultan Muhammad Qutb-Shah 
of Golconda (r. 1612-26), who had a great passion for books and made 
many important additions to the royal library, to transcribe copies of rare 
manuscripts. 

Mulla c Arab's name also appears on a royal illuminated copy of the 
Fawcfid-i Qutb-Shahi (The Benefits of Qutb-Shah), a collection of Persian 
prose and poetry compiled in 1630 by order of Muhammad's successor, 
'Abdullah Qutb-Shah (r. 1626-72). The manuscript, like this album page, is 
written in Nasta c liq script, which had come into vogue at Golconda during 
the reign of Muhammad-Quli Qutb-Shah (1580-1612) and thereafter continued 
to be used for all secular manuscripts and inscriptions. Five calligraphers 
worked on the eighty-eight folios; c Arab Katib (Arab the Scribe) and one 
other wrote the third part, dated a.h. 1040 (1631). 

From the names of the five calligraphers who worked on the Fawa^id-i 
Qutb-Shahi manuscript, as well as from other literary sources and the inscrip- 
tions on surviving Qutb-Shahi buildings, we can infer that most of the 
scribes at the Golconda court during this period were Persians from Shiraz, 
Isfahan, Tabriz, and Nishapur. Scholars, poets, painters, and calligraphers 
flocked to both the Mughal and the Deccani courts throughout the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries, for the Indian monarchs were famous for their 
lavish rewards for artistic talents. But Persians migrated in especially large 
numbers to Golconda, where the Qutb-Shahi dynasty was founded in about 
1518. The steady influx was never greater than during Muhammad Qutb- 
Shah's reign, when the Peshwas Mir Muhammad Mu 3 min and Shaikh Muham- 
mad ibn Khatun as well as several key officials and merchants of Golconda 
were all Persians. 

We are inclined to date this calligraphy to between 1625 and 1635. The 
opallike iridescence of the marbled paper, the perfectly spaced and elegantly 
written Nasta c liq script, and the beautiful illumination in Shirazi style make 
the page worthy of an album for a book-loving sultan. 

J.M. 



215. 

PEN BOX 

Signed, on bottom: "Raqm-i banda 
Rahim Deccani" 

Deccan, style of Golconda, ca. 1680 
Lacquer over papier-mache, VA x 12 x 2 3 /4 in. 
(4.8X30.5X7 cm.) 
Khalili Collection, London 



Some objects move us with their intimacy. This small box conjures up 
appealing domestic scenes. In the Islamic world every educated person as- 
pired to calligraphic excellence — for copying out Qur 3 anic verses, for writing 
poetry, and for corresponding with friends and lovers. Boys and girls of 
good family learned not only to express themselves elegantly but to write 
letters as gratifying to the eye as to the mind. They became connoisseurs of 
writing materials. Lustrously black, mellifluously flowing inks, steel knives 
and scissors of surgical perfection to nib reed pens and to cut paper — all 
these enhanced the pleasure of penmanship. 

Boxes for writing tools splendid as this one required months of artful 
toil by an entire workshop. Feather light and satin smooth but strong, almost 
impervious to water or ink stains, they were shaped and refined by a master 
of papier-mache to satisfy a discerning clientele. 

To the well-known artist Rahim Deccani, who signed this box, commis- 
sioned perhaps as a token of love, the challenge was as great as decorating a 



318 



small room. On top, vignetted between lithely voluptuous sprays of leaves, 
are portraits of a lover, his beloved, and their attendants. Rows of sensitively 
ornamental flowers transform the sides into a garden, while the bottom, 
painted with grapevines in gold, promises a glass of wine once the letter has 
been composed. 

Rahim's signing his name with the sobriquet "Deccani" suggests that 
he may no longer have been working in the Deccan, even though his mark- 
edly international mode, synthesizing Iranian, Deccani, and Mughal idioms, 
was formed there. His style is a gentle variant on that of an Iranian artist, 



Shaikh c Abbasi, who headed a Golconda atelier with his two sons, Muhammad 
Taqi and c Ali Naqi. Wherever this style was practiced — at Golconda, in 
Mughal India, or in Iran — the flavor was romantically exotic, and redolent 
of Golconda. 

With its exquisite fineness of touch and unexpectedly forceful design, 
the Khalili pen box represents Rahim Deccani at the peak of his engag- 
ingly delicate style. 1 

1. On Rahim Deccani, sec: Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, p. 201, pis. 169-76. 

Published: Zebrowski, "Indian Lacquerwork," p. 337, pi. 3c (dot.); Fehervari, "The 
Near East, the Middle East and India," pp. 159-60, p. 152, ill. (top and bottom only). 



Only in the Deccan, and especially at Golconda, did painted horses resem- 
ble swans and scamper like dragons. Propelled from behind by a swirling 
tail, this graceful stallion prances through a network of twittering arabesques. 
Dagger points of. his headgear notwithstanding, the determined but appre- 
hensive young groom could not possibly control his snorting, airborne steed. 
Even the lion-skin saddle, its mask gazing pitifully heavenward, holds on 
for dear life. 

Although this idiosyncratic, marvelously extreme picture defies attri- 
bution, its Iranian characteristics can be associated with Shaikh c Abbasi. 



216. 

HORSE AND GROOM 

Deccan, probably Golconda, 3rd quarter of 

17th century 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 5'/2 X 8V2 in. 
(14X21.5 cm.) 

Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Francis 
Bartlett Donation of 1912 and Picture Fund 

(14.699) 



Published: Coomaraswamy, Les Miniatures orientates, p. 68, no. 109, pi. 67. 




321 



217 



218 



217. 

B1DRI PLATE 

Deccan, Bidar, 2nd half of 17th century 
Alloy inlaid with silver and brass, 
diameter 12 in. (30.4 cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.1228) 



Bidriware, so called because the technique is believed to have originated 
at the city of Bidar in the Deccan, is related to the brass and bronze wares 
inlaid with gold and silver long known in the Islamic world. Bidri objects 
are cast from an alloy chiefly of zinc with an admixture of copper and tin, 
often with a varying proportion of lead. They are then inlaid or overlaid 
with silver, brass, or sometimes gold. Finally, a mud paste containing sal 
ammoniac is applied, and when the coating is removed the alloy has been 
imparted a permanent rich matte black that provides a pleasing contrast to 
the encrusted design. The earliest known bidriware is a huqqa base inlaid 
with silver and brass, now in the Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum, that is 
inscribed: "On Rabi c [10] 44 [1634] Najaf Quli, son of Nan, completed the 
work." 

Bidar, capital of the Muslim Bahmanid kings in the fifteenth century and 
seat of the Barid-Shahi dynasty in the early sixteenth, remained the princi- 
pal center of the industry, and bidri is still produced there and at Hyderabad. 
But during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, both Muslim and Hindu 
craftsmen made bidri objects at centers at Lucknow and Banaras in Uttar 
Pradesh, Purnea in Bihar, Murshidabad in West Bengal, and elsewhere. The 
simple, elegant shapes of seventeenth-century bidriware derive from Persian, 
Mughal, and Deccani prototypes, and the deeply inlaid decoration is based 
chiefly on Mughal and Deccani designs. Seminaturalistic floral motifs typi- 
cal of all Mughal decorative arts at the time appear in bidri as well, yet the 
vibrant, uncrowded Deccani adaptations are charged with exceptional vitality; 
in the best examples the floral designs seem almost to burst with an explosive 
force. 

This plate, one of the finest examples of early bidri, was made at Bidar 
sometime between 1650 and 1700. An accomplished craftsman sensitively 



and imaginatively rendered the originally Mughal design in teh-nishan work 
(the Persian translates literally as "sitting on the bottom"), a type of koftgari 
technique in which the alloy is deeply engraved and gold, silver, or brass 
hammered into the grooves and filed down until the finished inlay is flush 
with the surface. (In ordinary koftgari, very fine wire is hammered into 
shallower grooves.) The plate's interior is embellished with eight cartouches, 
each of which encloses a dianthuslike plant bearing six flowers against a 
background filled with tiny Chinese cloud motifs in the manner that became 
characteristic of Mughal and Deccani ornamentation in the sixteenth and 
seventeenth centuries. A chevron pattern decorates the flattened rim, and 
scrolling floral designs ornament the shallow cavetto, the spaces between the 
cartouches, and the band encircling the blank central medallion. 

J.M. 

Published: The Indian Heritage, p. 142, no. 481. 



The forms of bidriware are infinitely varied and always useful: huqqa bases, 
containers for spices and for betel nut and the lime and spices to go with it, 
wine and sherbet bottles, salvers, dishes, cups, and many more. Always 
eager to attract new markets, the metalworkers of Bidar adjusted their styles 
over the centuries to satisfy all manner of clients. Deccani sultans and their 
courtiers, Mughals, Rajputs, and rich merchants, French, English, and other 
Europeans — all were offered irresistibly enticing objects, which were often 
kept as eye-pleasers in architectural niches. 

Using tracings, designers of bidri objects borrowed motifs from textiles, 
architectural ornament, and many other sources, sensitively adapting them 
and changing the patterns according to their own good judgment and to 
their patrons' tastes. Although bidriware has survived in considerable quan- 
tities from the mid-seventeenth century onward, no two objects are quite 
alike. From decade to decade, the precise formula of its alloy of zinc, tin, 
and copper varied almost as much as its ornament. Presumably, the ateliers 
descended within families which maintained trade secrets, pattern books, 
and networks of customers through the years, offering goods of varying 
levels of quality and price based on metal content, workmanship, and design. 
In the late eighteenth century, craftsmen from Bidar may have moved to 
Lucknow and there developed styles pleasing to the local nawabs and their 
courts. 

The Metropolitan Museum's huqqa base is distinguished for its bold yet 
delicate floral brass inlays, masterfully related to the globular form of the bowl. 



218. 

HUQQA BASE 

Deccan, Bidar, last quarter of 17th century 
Alloy inlaid with brass, height 6 7 A in. 
(17.5 cm.), diameter 6V2 in. (16.5 cm.) 
The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 
Purchase, Louis E. and Theresa S. Seley Pur- 
chase Fund for Islamic Art and Rogers Fund 
(1984.221) 



A fish (mahi) was one of the nine royal ensigns (nine being the number of 
perfection) symbolizing the Mughal emperors' conquest of the world. In an 
imperial retinue, standard-bearers carrying replicasjof :the|nme[emblems rode 
before the emperor on elephants and camels. Mahi o maratib (literally, fish 
and ranks), denoted by the figure of a fish with two balls or other insignia, 
was one of the highest honors the emperor could bestow on a noble. W. 
Irvine, in his Army of the Indian Moghuls, describes a Mughal fish standard, 
meant to be placed horizontally on the point of a spear, as four feet long 
and made of gilded copper. 1 Though we have no documentary evidence, 
fish standards must also have played a ceremonial role at the courts of the 
Muslim sultans who ruled in the Deccan from the fourteenth to the nineteenth 
century. The Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum has two other Deccani fish 
standards, both brass and both of the eighteenth century, in its collection. 

This iron standard was cast in two parts that are held together by rivets. 
There are two circular holes in one of the bottom fins and an elongated slit 
in the tail for attaching a clamp to secure the standard to a handle. Sculpted 
with a careful eye for naturalistic detail, the noble fish has finely modeled 
scales and six fins, two on its back, two on its belly, and one on each side. 



219. 

FISH STANDARD 

Deccan, perhaps Golconda or Bijapur, 

17th century 

Iron with traces of silver overlay, length 
23'/8in. (58.7 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (84.1) 



219 



The eye sockets once held shining stones, and the entire body was covered 
with thin sheets of silver overlaid on crosshatchmg, a technique often used 
in the Deccan to enrich arms and armor. Quite apart from its actual use this 
is a fascinating object and a stirring work of art. 

J.M. 

1. Irvine, The Army of the Indian Moghuls, p. 33. 



220. 

CALLIGRAPHIC HAWK STANDARD 
Deccan, perhaps Hyderabad, late 17th century 
Gilded copper, height WA in. (34.9 cm.) 
Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
(I. M. 163-1913) 



Although most Mughals were Muslims of the Sunni sect, there were many 
ites in the Deccan, especially in Golconda and Hyderabad. Like the 
Mughals, they participated in processions to celebrate religious and state 
occasions as well as familial rites of passage. Holy men, rulers, courtiers 
and multitudes of followers joined these parades, some riding elephants or 
horses, most on foot, and all dressed up for the occasion. Bobbing on poles 
above their heads, emblematic standards lent further meaning and majesty 
to the events, whether celebratory festivities or dirges in commemoration 
of he Shi ite martyrs Husain and Hasan. This gilded copper hawk is strik- 
ingly designed in Tughra script with the religious formula known as Nadi 
Aliyyan: 

Call c Ah, the locus of manifestations of miracles— 
You will find him a help in the vicissitudes of life. 
All grief and sorrow will pass 

Thanks to your rule for saintliness], O c Ah— O c Ali— O c Ah!' 
This apotropaic formula was apparently introduced by the Safavids of Iran 
for there are no instances of its use prior to 1500. It became one of the most 
frequently used invocations from Turkey across to India and was repro- 
duced on paper, metal, stone, and cloth to bring good luck and for protection 
It is also engraved on small agate talismans worn by devotees. 

1. Translation by Annemane Schimmel. 

Published: Wheeler and Jayakar, Textiles and Ornamental Arts, p. 63. 



324 




325 



Before and after the Mughal seizure of the Deccani sultanates in the late 
seventeenth century, Mughal governors, officers, and soldiers cultivated 
Deccani ways. The leisurely, almost excessively civilized attitudes of the 
Deccan were infectious, as can be seen in this portrait of a determinedly 
official Mughal in his magnificent garden, proudly presenting, or receiving, 
a small piece of paper. The gallant nobleman and his attendants and emissar- 
ies are as crisply silhouetted on the page as the formal garden is laid out, 
with immaculately ordered watercourses, manicured trees, and obediently 
symmetrical arrangements of birds and deer. If we can believe the artist, 
Allah-wirdi Khan's life had achieved crystalline harmoniousness. Only a 
small peacock in the foreground, turning away, defies the system. 

The late seventeenth century was a time of artistic ferment. Mughal 
officers from the north spent many years in the Deccan, where they employed 
artists trained at the great Deccani courts, such as Bijapur and Hyderabad. 
Many of these painters, as well as craftsmen and musicians, migrated with 
their new patrons to northern India, where Deccani styles blended with Mughal 
and Rajput traditions (see especially nos. 241, 242, 248, 249, 260, 265, 267). 

Published: Das, Treasures of Indian Painting, ser. 1, pi. n; Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, 
pp. 236-37, pi. xxii. 



221. 

ALLAH-WIRDI KHAN WITH 
ATTENDANTS IN A GARDEN 
Deccan, Hyderabad, early 18th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 2\Vi x W/h in. (54.6 x 41.6 cm.) 
Miniature: \3 3 A x 10 in. (34.9 x 25.4 cm.) 
Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 
(AG. 652) 



In the Deccani outposts of the waning Mughal empire, even officers at 
comparatively minor courts lived with extravagant elegance. Atachin Beg 
Bahadur Qalmik, a Turkman by lineage, indulged his artistic whims when 
he was painted against a spreading landscape alive with birds beneath rain 




222. 

ATACHIN BEG BAHADUR QALMIK 
OUT HAWKING 

Deccan, perhaps Burhanpur, early 18th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 20-y* x 15-V4 in. (51.9 x 40 cm.) 
Miniature: 15 x liy 2 in. (38.1 X 29.2 cm.) 
Trustees of the British Museum, London 
(1937.9-20.06) 



222 



327 



clouds that augur well for the next harvest. Hiding within the pyrotechni- 
cally striped coat, flowered sash, and sumptuous turban, the man himself is 
blandly plain, far less impressive than his belled and ringleted page, run- 
ning alongside, his saluting courtier, or his horse. Indeed, the high-stepping 
steed, with its opulent saddlecloth, plumes, and corkscrewing yak tail, is 
unconscionably curried and coiffed. His dapples twinkle like stars through a 
waterfall of mane, which ends in fetlock-tickling curls. 

Who was Atachin Beg who so poetically adored his stallion? We are 
unlikely ever to know. But this curiously stirring picture indicates that its 
patron deeply appreciated and helped shape a marvelously extreme phase of 
later Deccani art, one that was rocketed to yet more fanciful heights at the 
Rajasthani court of Kishangarh a few decades later (see nos. 248, 249, 250). 

Although Burhanpur never ranked in importance with Delhi, Agra, or 
Lahore, it was a major center of learning and religious activity, with many 
madrasas. c Abd ar-Rahim, the Khankhanan, the most distinguished and dis- 
cerning of all nonimperial Mughal patrons (see no. 161), lived there during 
the first quarter of the sixteenth century, and Prince Khurram (later Em- 
peror Shah Jahan) chose Burhanpur as his headquarters prior to his rebellion 
against Emperor Jahangir. Many weavers from Sind and Tatta migrated to 
Burhanpur during the early seventeenth century, and their splendid printed 
cottons lent colorful dignity to Mughal and Rajput courts (see no. 179). 

Published: Zebrowski, Deccani Painting, pp. 212-13, pi. 185. 



223. 

PECHHAVAI FOR A TEMPLE OR SHRINE 
Deccan, perhaps Hyderabad, ca. late 
18th century 

Paint on cotton, 8 ft. x 8 ft. 6 in. 
(2.44 x 2.59 m.) 

Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Gift of 
John Goelct (67.837) 



Temples and household shrines sacred to the Hindu god Lord Krishna usu- 
ally had altars bearing images behind which hung pechhavais (that which 
hangs at the back). In themselves greatly appealing works of art, these painted 
textiles should be imagined in situ, not only as backdrops but with offerings 
of flowers, sweets, spices, and even models of bullock carts or boats ar- 
ranged before them and being worshiped by priests and other devotees. This 
joyous pechhavai is partly based on temple hangings painted in Rajasthan at 
Nathadwara, site of the major Vaishnavite temple complex and of the image 
of Lord Krishna as Shri Nathji. 

In the center of the composition, which is appropriate to Varsha, the 
season of rain, a kadamba tree, possibly symbolic of the god himself, is 
attended by six gopis, Krishna's devoted hcrdswomen. Mango trees heavy 
with fruit are at either side, and red and green parrots roost in the branches. 
Flowers, probably signifying nourishing rain, are showered from the skies 
by airborne deities, while in the lower register cows and gopalas — all associ- 
ated with Vaishnavite worship — contribute to the divine mood. 

Published: The Rathbone Years, p. 52, no. 36. 

I am indebted to Kalyan Krishna for providing information employed in this entry. 



328 




Overleaf, 259, detail > 



IV THE 




RAJPUT WORLD 



THE RAJPUT WORLD 



No one knows precisely when and how the Rajputs first 
came to India. "History," as usual, blends myth with fact. 
Rajputs, whose name is Hindi for sons (putras) of kings 
(rajans), are legendary descendants of the sun and the 
moon. As Rajput lore recounts it, their primary ancestor, 
called forth by the gods to defend the Brahmin priesthood, 
rose from the flames of a sage's firepit atop Mount Abu in 
southwestern Rajasthan. According to scholars, Rajputs 
descend from the Iranian and Central Asian tribes — Parthians, 
Kushans, Shakas, Huns, and others — who invaded India 
between the fourth and the seventh century, moving down 
through the mountain passes in the northwest and across 
the Indus Valley into what came to be known as Rajputana, 
land of the Rajputs, and is today the state of Rajasthan. 
Like the Aryans who came by the same route during the 
second millennium B.C., the invaders were soon Indianized, 
adding yet another variation to the pattern as they were 
absorbed into the cultural, social, and religious mosaic that 
is India. They intermarried with the indigenous Indian 
tribes whose ancestry preceded even the Aryans' arrival, as 
well as with high-caste Hindu families who were partly of 
Aryan descent. They became Hindus and were incorpo- 
rated into the second of the four classes of Hindu society, 
the Kshatriyas, warriors and rulers who arc the protectors 
of the first class, the Brahmins. 

Proud followers of an ancient code of honor, Rajputs 
rank loyalty to family and clan second only to their 
paramount duty to serve the gods and the Brahmin priests. 
The medieval Rajput world brings to mind Europe's age of 
chivalry. During the early Middle Ages, in the centuries 
following the demise of the Gupta empire and the empire 
of King Harsha (d. 647) of Kanauj that succeeded it, 
Rajputs ruled much of northwestern India. Maharajas, 
rajas, maharanas, ranas, raos, rais, and other titled heads of 
the thirty-six Rajput clans and their many cadet, or junior, 
houses established small kingdoms in Rajasthan and eventu- 
ally controlled feudal territories to the north in the Punjab 
Hills and to the south and west in Central India. The 



wealthiest and most powerful of the patriarchs built mas- 
sive fortified complexes to house and protect their many 
dependents and their armies, and their entire establishments 
sometimes spent part of the year at hunting lodges, plea- 
sure pavilions, or military encampments. Their constant 
feuding, however, left the Rajputs ill equipped to face the 
armies of Islam that came in ever increasing waves after the 
tenth century. 

There were occasions when Rajput states combined 
forces in unsuccessful attempts to defend themselves, but 
the alliances were temporary and never involved more than 
a few of the clans. Some of the princes allied themselves 
early on with the Muslims, and one by one the others either 
acquiesced or were forced to submit. The senior Rajput 
house, the firmly traditional Sisodyas who ruled over 
Mewar, in western Rajasthan far from the Muslim centers, 
stoutly opposed even Akbar's imperial ambitions. Their 
centuries-long struggle ended ten years after Akbar's death, 
when Mewar fell to Emperor Jahangir in 1615 and the 
maharaja of Mewar, like the other Rajput rulers, began 
paying homage to the Mughal court with revenues and 
soldiers for the imperial armies. As the Mughal empire 
crumbled in the eighteenth century, the princes once again 
took advantage of a political vacuum to expand their 
territories, only to retreat once more when the British 
replaced the Mughals as the major power in India. Although 
many of the rajas continued to maintain their states, the 
new Raj sent residents to oversee the courts and, like its 
predecessor, exacted tribute in the form of taxes and 
soldiers. When independence came in 1947, the Rajputs lost 
most of what was left of their power. 

The pictures and objects assembled here reflect the 
Rajput world from the sixteenth to the nineteenth century, 
when it was becoming a more and more complicated blend 
of the indigenous and the foreign. The great Rajput 
fort and palace complexes that still stand, many of them 
now museums, are often confusing monuments to centu- 
ries of change and accommodation. The structures were 



333 



originally massively built for defense, with provision against 
attack not only for the ruler and his household but also for 
the villagers and their animals. During the mid-seventeenth 
century, Jahangir's and Shah Jahan's magnificent palaces at 
Agra and Delhi influenced the forts of their feudatories, 
and living quarters increased in comfort and splendor. 
White marble replaced red sandstone, and flower patterned 
carvings, inlays, and textiles enriched courtyards and darbar 
halls. When Mughal power began to wane, rocked 
by the invasions of Nadir Shah and others during the 
eighteenth century, traditional Rajput ways were reasserted. 
Less threatened by the imperial armies, the maharajas no 
longer had to live in forbidding forts. City palaces like the 
one Jai Singh built at Jaipur came into vogue: still stoutly 
walled and defensible, but open to the sun and more 
spacious, with extensive courts and gardens. 

After the early nineteenth century, when many of the 
chiefs of Rajputana signed treaties with the British, European 
styles became fashionable, radically changing the appear- 
ance of Rajput architecture, art, and life. The British 
resident assigned to each court brought with him family, 
staff, household furnishings, pictures, books, and bric-a- 
brac by the barrel. In due course, English architects such as 
Sir Swinton Jacob were designing grandly operatic "Indo- 
Saracenic" palaces for the adventuresome, rich Rajput 
princes. Always respectful of power and fascinated by 
England's culture, Rajputs admired and began to emulate 
the exotic English ways of life. They delighted in the 
spectacle, the "tamasha," of it all, and before long mahara- 
jas' costumesjuxtaposed Mughal irises with Scottish plaids, 
and English tables, chairs, clocks, and mirrors began to 
crop up even in the zenana, where the women received 
them with a mixture of astonishment, delight, and horror. 

The Rajput world was of course never composed 
exclusively of Rajputs. The Hindu caste system has been 
likened to a man: the Brahmins, priests and scholars, are 
his mouth; the ruling and military class of Kshatriyas are 
his arms; Vaishyas, farmers and merchants, form his thighs; 
and the fourth class, the Shudras, are the man's essential 
feet. Without the others, none of the classes or the 
thousands of castes and subcastes that they comprise could 
survive. At the Rajput courts, Brahmin priests presided 
over morning prayers and the continuous cycle of sacred 
rituals and festivals. Brahmins also served as teachers and, 
because all castes may accept food from their hands, as 
cooks. Vaishyas were hired to look after state funds and to 
provide many specialized crafts and services; one of their 
many subcastes sold sweets, others were musicians and 
artists. Shudras worked in the fields and the dairies and at 
carpentry, building, metalsmithing, and dozens of other 
occupations. 

Tribal people outside the caste system also often 
played crucial roles. At Jaipur, tribesmen were the hereditary 
guards of the state treasure, and when a new ruler was 
installed the ceremony was not valid until the maharaja's 
forehead had been marked with the tikka by a member of 
the Mina tribe, who had once ruled the region. Other 
religious groups worked in professions that often paral- 
leled those of Hindus. Jains were businessmen and admin- 
istrators, as were Parsis. Muslim influence was scarcely felt 
in the Punjab Hills and remote areas of Rajputana before 
the eighteenth century, but at the Hindu courts of eastern 
Rajasthan and Central India Muslims tended to be omnipres- 



ent by the late 1400s, when the first of the pictures shown 
here was painted for a Muslim patron. Muslim nobility such 
as the nawabs of Tonk formed part of the feudal system of 
Rajasthan, and they were among the honored guests at 
Rajput marriages and gatherings. 

The walls of the major Rajput palaces enclosed what 
amounted to large, self-sufficient towns. Even fairly modest 
Rajput homes invariably contained a shrine, a darbar hall 
for receiving guests, a mardana where the men of the 
household slept, and a zenana for the women and children 
(a custom borrowed from the Muslim home), as well as 
servants' quarters and rooms for cooking and dining. In a 
grand palace, the place of worship was often a large 
temple, the mardana and zenana each a sprawling complex 
of private apartments with its own servants and separate 
gardens and pavilions. As did the Mughal emperors (whose 
customs and architecture were based at least in part on 
Rajput prototypes), the head of the house ruled over what 
was often a large army and a vast number of workers, 
servants, and retainers. Stables and barns housed scores of 
elephants, camels, horses, and other animals. Beneath the 
palace, in a labyrinth of godowns, was storage space for 
foodstuffs, weaponry, clothing, carpets and furniture, tents 
and awnings, jewels and gold, and manuscripts and 
paintings. Each section had a staff, in some instances not 
just custodians but craftsmen and artists who could make 
almost anything the court required. 

Like Mughal emperors and nobles, Rajput princes 
spent much time in tents, virtual cities of cloth and rope 
that included a portable palace complete with shrines, 
public and private audience halls, living quarters, a treasury, 
and an armory. When a Rajput prince of the standing of the 
maharaja of Jodhpur served in a major campaign, such as 
those of Shah Jahan or Aurangzeb in the Deccan, whole 
communities were away from home for years on end. 
When in the field, a prince was outfitted with two com- 
plete suites of tents, one of which he occupied while the 
other was being set up at the next stage of the march. (A 
Rajput or Mughal army moved at a rate that varied from a 
leisurely seven and a half miles per day to thirty-five on a 
forced march.) The raja traveled in stately progress, accompa- 
nied by an entourage of priests, wives, children, courtiers, 
musicians, dancing girls, artists, and domestic animals, in 
addition to the hunting and military establishments. A 
special commissary provided the princely household with 
water and food, some brought on camelback, the rest 
foraged and hunted for en route. The army looked after 
itself, buying food, clothing, weapons, and sweets and 
other luxuries from the merchants of an accompanying 
bazaar, which was also staffed with bankers and money- 
lenders. Food for the elephants and horses was provided 
either by a small army of grasscutters or by special merchants 
of the Banjara caste, who traveled very slowly (two miles a 
day) with as many as 50,000 bullocks laden with sacks of 
grain. By mutual consent, the Banjaras were never injured 
by the enemy. 

Brilliant generals and mighty warriors though they 
may have been, the rajas of Rajasthan and the Punjab Hills 
were also often men of formidable intellect, architects, 
poets, and connoisseurs who surrounded themselves with 
highly skilled and talented scholars, artisans, and painters. 
We display here but a sampling of the output of the 
Rajasthani and Hill, or Pahari, ateliers during the more 



334 



than four hundred years of Rajput patronage and artistry 
that nourished a great flowering of Indian painting. 

The cultural traditions of the Rajput courts underwent 
a profound change after the establishment of Mughal rule 
in the sixteenth century. The series of Rajput alliances 
forged by Akbar soon after his accession to the throne in 
1556 gave the courts of Amber (later Jaipur), Jodhpur, 
Bikaner, and Bundi a new prominence by their association 
with and exposure to the emperor's brilliant and cosmo- 
politan court. 

Prior to the strongly secular influence of the Mughal 
court, Hindu painting was almost exclusively religious in 
nature. A resurgence of popular Hindu bhakti cults during 
the fifteenth century sparked renewed interest in the divini- 
ties of ancient India, notably in the two incarnations of 
Vishnu, the god Rama (hero of the Ramayana) and the 
youthful, dark-skinned cowherd god Krishna. Their exploits 
were celebrated in devotional texts and lyrics in both San- 
skrit and the vernacular languages, and they also became 
popular themes for manuscript illustration. Books from the 
Ramayana and the Mahabharata, the love lyrics of the 
Chaurapanchasika of Bilhana, the tales of Krishna and 
Radha from the Gita Govinda of Jayadeva, the heroes and 
heroines of Keshavadasa's Rasikapriya — all these became 
the subjects of countless series of paintings distinguished 
by fluency of line and glowing color, whose figures and 
settings were suffused with symbolic meaning. Love, 
whether human or divine, remained the dominant theme 
of Hindu literature, as it had earlier been in Sanskrit texts. 

Following the successive waves of Mughal influence in 
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the local schools of 
Rajasthan and Central India assimilated elements of Mughal 
style in varying degrees. Malwa and Bundelkhand, for 
example, too remote to be much influenced by Mughal 
customs, remained closest to the bold drawings, simplified 
designs, and color schemes of the pre-Mughal style. The 
desert state of Marwar, by contrast, with its capital at 
Jodhpur, absorbed many elements of the Mughal style 
(notably evolving its own refined tradition of portraiture), 
but never completely lost its indigenous folk rhythms. The 
ranas of Mewar, who had so staunchly held out against the 
Mughal efforts to dominate Rajasthan, patronized a school 
of painting that produced an abundance of religious 
manuscripts in the early Rajasthani style; but after about 
1700, Udaipur artists produced large and impressive paint- 
ings of the palace environs. 

Portraits, darbar scenes, processions, and festivals 
were popular subjects, and they provide an excellent record 
of Rajput court life in the eighteenth century. The courts 
of Jaipur, Bikaner, Bundi, and Kishangarh, all of which 
were economically and politically linked with Mughal rule, 
were major centers of painting in the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries. They combined Rajasthani and Mughal 
features with ease and assurance, but they also developed 
their own conventions in the treatment of color and of land- 
scape figures. Because of military contacts with the Deccan, 
the schools of Bikaner and Bundi received the added 
stimulus of Deccani style and color schemes. The Kishangarh 
school is best known for the stylized, attenuated portraits 
in a late Mughal style, often shown against an extensive 
landscape vista, that were created during the reign of the 
Vaishnavite devotee and poet Raja Sawant Singh (r. 1748-64). 
The Kotah school, occasionally indistinguishable from that 



of Bundi, the sister state from which Kotah was separated 
in the early seventeenth century, is best known for the 
large, dramatic, and minutely observed hunting scenes that 
it produced from about 1720 to 1870. 

In the Pahari region of the Himalayan states, an 
area only some three hundred miles long by a hundred 
wide, indigenous traditions at the numerous minor Rajput 
kingdoms remained free of internationalizing Mughal 
influences far longer. Their rajas sent fewer officers and 
soldiers to serve in the imperial army, and the Mughal 
emperors rarely visited the more inaccessible courts in the 
Hills. Though their cultural background was similar to 
that of their southern counterparts in Rajasthan, the 
intervening expanse of the Punjab Plains kept them in 
relative isolation. 

The origins of Pahari painting are still relatively 
obscure, but its earliest associations are with the court 
paintings of Basohli. These are remarkable for their taut 
line and vibrant and sophisticated color combinations, and 
paintings of Krishna and Devi are highly charged with an 
almost primitive intensity. 

Although there is some evidence of Mughal influence 
even in the early phases of the Pahari tradition (in paintings 
from Bilaspur, for example), it was only in the second 
quarter of the eighteenth century that fundamental changes 
were introduced. This was the result of Nadir Shah's 
conquest of Delhi in 1739, after which artists trained 
in the Mughal style began emigrating to provincial centers 
in search of patronage. At such courts as Guler, Chamba, 
Jammu, Kangra, and Nurpur, these painters applied their 
refined technique to depicting Hindu poetical and devo- 
tional subjects. Thus the mature Pahari style was a combina- 
tion of Mughal drawing techniques and Pahari lyricism: as 
in Rajasthan, the love of Krishna and Radha was a univer- 
sal theme, and artists depicted it on all levels, from the 
spiritual to the erotic, often blending the two. 

There was a short-lived renaissance of traditional 
styles when Mughal power weakened in the eighteenth 
century. However, the invasions of the Hill kingdoms by 
the Gurkhas, and their annexation by the Sikhs in the early 
nineteenth century, combined with the growing Rajput 
taste for European paintings and photographs, eventually 
deprived Pahari and Rajasthani artists alike of their much 
needed patronage, and in effect marked the end of India's 
great painting traditions. 



Many of the liveliest early pictures from the Rajput world illustrate romances, 
fable books, and Hindu epics, such as the Laur Chanda, the Bhagavad Gita, 
and the Ramayana, which combine moral and religious instruction and ani- 
mated storytelling. Rajput courtiers, townspeople, and villagers learned about 
the gods and about life from these captivating tales, some of which they 
memorized as children and which became fundamental to their thought, 
much as Biblical tales in the Western traditions. 

This miniature is from the Laur Chanda, a romance written by Mulla 
Da 3 ud for the chief minister of Firoz Shah Tughluq of Delhi in 1377 or 1378. 
It describes the frustrating love of the beautiful maiden Chanda for Launk, 
each of whom suffered from being married to someone else. Eager to be 
together, the young couple plotted to elope. One night, as shown here, 
Laurik went to Chanda's house, where she was under guard in an upper 
room, and tossed up a rope ladder to her, and she climbed down to join him. 

Working in a wiry, animated style related to Western Indian painting 
(see no. 31), the anonymous artist recounted the episode vividly, using only 
a few colors and swiftly sketched lines. Starry skies and a see-through house 
fix time and place; and the dramatis personae are projected as types rather 
than as individuals by formulaic, angular simplifications of feature and gesture. 
Nevertheless, Chanda's loving eagerness, her maid's apprehensive encourage- 
ment, the guard's obliging lassitude, and Laurik's muscular boldness are 
conveyed with directness and verve. 

Published: The Art oj India and Pakistan, p. 109, no. 398, pi. 82; Krishnadasa, "An 
Illustrated Avadhi of Laur-Chanda," p. 70, fig. 2; Khandalavala and Chandra, New 
Documents of Indian Painting, pp. 48, 133, no. 99, fig. 99; M. Chandra, Studies in Early 
Indian Painting, pp. 97-98, fig. 49; Khandalavala, "The Mrigavat of Bharat Kala 
Bhavan," p. 25, pi. 3; Krishna, "An Illustrated Manuscript of the Laur-Chanda," p. 
276 and n. 5, p. 288, fig. 613. 



224. 

THE HEROINE ELOPES 
From a manuscript of the Laur Chanda, or 
Chandayana (The Story of Chanda), of 
Mulla Da'ud 

Uttar Pradesh, ca. 1450-75 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 8V4 x in. (22.2 x 14.5 cm.) 
Miniature: 8 3 /* x 4 1 / 2 in. (21.2 x 11.4 cm.) 
Bharat Kala Bhavan, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi (5440) 



A particularly vital early group of miniatures from the Rajput world is 
represented by this battle scene, the four parts of which were recently recog- 
nized by Daniel J. Ehnbohm as forming a single composition. 1 For many 
years, probably for centuries, these fragments had been lost within a now 
dispersed, brilliant set of one hundred or more illustrations — in the same 
style, some by the same artist — to the Bhagavata Parana, the Hindu epic 
recounting the life of Lord Krishna. 2 Inasmuch as the Blue God does not 
appear in this dizzyingly charged scene, which bears no text on either the 
recto or the verso, the actual battle has not been identified. Ehnbohm has 
suggested, however, that it might be from a manuscript of the Mahahharata 
(The Book of Wars). 

The Bhagavata Purana series has been dated by Jagdish Mittal to about 
1541 -42. 3 His argument is based on the presence of the numcrallike marks in 
Devanagari style with which several of the horses shown are branded; the 
significance of these marks is evident in light of the following historical 
events. In 1537 Sher Khan, the Afghan leader of northern India, asserted his 
independence of the Mughals, overrunning Bengal. In 1539 he overwhelmed 
the army of Humayun and the following year annihilated the Mughal army 
at Kanauj. Humayun fled to Iran, and Sher Khan as Sher Shah Sur took 
control of the Mughal empire. He reigned until 1545. 

The branding of Sher Shah Sur's cavalry horses was introduced be- 
tween April 1541 and April 1542, when the army was in the area of Agra 
and Delhi. 4 The practice must have come to the attention of artists in that 
region. In all likelihood, the Bhagavata Purana series was being painted at 
that time and the artists incorporated the new feature in the battle scenes. 5 

As reassembled here, the picture is a noble and imposing example of a 
crucially important style among the infinity of syntheses that evolved in 
Indian painting. And within it, many earlier artistic strains can be identified 
— indigenous Indian styles, sultanate traditions, even vestiges from such 
ancient ancestors as the Sassanians, who contributed the pinwheel crown 
worn by the gray-bearded warrior in the fragment at the upper right. 



225. 

BATTLE SCENE 

Four fragments constituting a folio from a 
dispersed manuscript of the Bhagavata Purana 
Uttar Pradesh, Delhi or Agra area, or Mewar, 
2nd quarter of 16th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: approx. I6V2 X 20 in. 
(41.9x50.8 cm.) 

Each fragment: approx. 7 X 9 3 /8 in. 
(17.8x23.9 cm.) 

a. Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of 
Indian Art, Hyderabad (76.119) 

b. Collection Jagdish Goenka, Bombay 

c. Collection Stuart Cary Welch 

d. The Kronos Collections, New York 



Marvelous to behold, this heroic melee is also highly instructive, enabling us 
through its scale to envision long lost murals from the area of Delhi and 
Agra prior to the absorption of the style into the all-encompassing new 
artistic synthesis under Akbar. With its crescendo of energy, animated gestures, 
and vivid thumbnail characterizations of men and animals, this style can be 
seen as a major element in the formation of yet another evolutionary stage 
during the early Mughal period. Indeed, it provided the dynamism to a 
defensible if very much simplified art-historical equation: the style of this 
battle scene combined with the imported Safavid idiom of Mir Sayyid c Ali 
and c Abd as-Samad (see no. 84) to create Akbar's new synthesis, exemplified 
in the Hamza-nama (no. 91). 

1. Daniel J. Ehnbohm made the important realization in the late 1970s that three of 
the fragments were from a single painting, a theory borne out when he saw the 
fourth, the Kronos miniature, in 1981. 

2. Strikingly similar in style to the Bhagavata Purana series and to this battle scene are 
the illustrations to a manuscript dated 1516. See: Khandalavala and Chandra, An 
Illustrated Aranyaka Pavvan. Also related is a battle scene, apparently the only surviv- 
ing picture from another series. See: Welch, A Flower from livery Meadow, no. 5. 

3. Personal communication, January 1985. 

4. Irvine, The Army of the Indian Moghuls, p. 46. 

5. Khandalavala and Mittal, "The Bhagavata," pp. 28-32, pis. ix, x, xiv, fig. 4a. 

Published: Welch and Beach, Gods, Thrones, and Peacocks, pp. 24, 115-16, pi. 3a; 
Lerner, The Flame and the Lotus, pp. 146-47, no. 57. 



22() 



This sharp-eyed scribe is as monumentally imposing as a yogi. Propped up 
like the tripod bearing his water flask, his knees held fast by a sash wound 
around them, he works smilingly. The portrayal perfectly exemplifies the 
indigenous tradition, experienced more by the mind's eye than by direct 
observation. The scribe's fingers bend unnaturally backward, totally 
contradicting our knowledge of reality, and — perhaps by inverting our 
expectation — impelling us all the more to feel the grip of his fingers and to 
hear the scratch of reed against paper. Our empathic response probably par- 
allels that of Akbar, and it recalls Abu'l-Fazl's claim that Akbar's "[Hindu] 
artists surpass our conception of things." 1 A Scribe brings to mind Akbar's 
vivid little portraits of single figures, such as the one of Tansen (no. 106); 
similarly stark in its isolation against a flat ground, the figure is so extraordi- 
narily moving because the artist painted from both his inner and his outer 
eye, each view enhancing the other. 

The Bharat Kala Bhavan owns two hundred fifty folios of the Mrigavata 
series to which this miniature belongs. The text, written in the Kaithi script 
associated with eastern Uttar Pradesh, has been described by Karl Khandalavala 
as "a strange tale of love, fantasy, magic, and the supernatural." 2 It was 
composed by Shaikh Qutban in 1503, apparently for a ruler of the Sharqi 
dynasty of Jaunpur. Always lively, the pictures can be assigned to several 
artists of various levels of accomplishment, some like this one being master- 
fully incisive, others verging on the folkloristic. The scribe's simplified fish- 
shaped eye and zigzag profile are timeless formulas found even today in the 
carved and polychromed puppets of Rajasthan, and familiar here from the 
Bengali mortuary portrait (no. 46). 

1. Abu'l-Fazl, A* in, vol. 1, p. 107. 

2. Khandalavala, "The Mrigavat of Bharat Kala Bhavan," p. 27. 

Published: Khandalavala, "The Mrigavat of Bharat Kala Bhavan," pp. 34-35, fig. 
90, folio 32. 



226. 

A SCRIBE 

From a manuscript of the Mrigavata of Qutban 
Probably Uttar Pradesh, ca. 1525 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 8 x 7'/h in. (20.3 X 18.1 cm.) 
Miniature: 5'/i X 5 in. (13.3 X 12.7 cm.) 
Bharat Kala Bhavan, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi (7957) 



<225d, detail 



341 




227. 

BILHANA MAKES LOVE WITH 
CHAMPAVATI 

From a manuscript of the Chaurapanchasika 
(Fifty Verses of Chauras) of Bilhana 
Mewar or Uttar Pradesh, mid-16th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 6 3 /* x SVi in. 
(16.3x21.7 cm.) 

Bharat Kala Bhavan, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi (10515) 



The text reads: "At this moment of my death, nay, even in my next birth, 
I shall ever remember that swan in the cluster of lotuses of love, with her 
eyes closed in the ecstasy of love, all her limbs relaxed, while her garments 
and the tresses of her hair were strewn in disorder." According to legend, 
the Sanskrit love poems of the Chaurapanchasika (Fifty Verses of Chauras) 
were written in the eleventh century by Chauras, a young Brahmin who was 
in love with the daughter of the ruler of Kanchinpur. The ruler was so 
incensed by the young man's presumptuousness that he sentenced him to 
death. While awaiting his fate, the poet put into verse his recollections of 
happy days and nights of love. Another version of the story, followed in this 
manuscript, states that the ill-fated young man was named Bilhana, the king 
Virasimha, and the enamored daughter Champavati. 1 

In his miniature, the artist followed the spirit of the text as decorously 
as the translator. Bilhana undresses Champavati with surgical scrupulousness 
while Champavati averts her glance. The lotus petals on the edges of their 
pavilion, however, glow with the flame of love. 

The eighteen illustrations surviving from the series were acquired by 
N. C. Mehta at Pratapgarh, near Mewar, and quite possibly they were painted 
there. Since their discovery, they have been recognized as key documents of 
Indian painting. The style, with its even, wiry outlines, coolly accomplished 
brushwork, and crisp masterfulness, represents the Mewar idiom in full 
ripeness, not at a more vigorous and experimental earlier stage such as we 
find in the battle scene (no. 225). 

1. For further comment on the series, see: The Art of India and Pakistan, p. 109, no. 
3%, pi. 81; M. Chandra, Studies in Early Indian Painting, fig. 69. 

Published: Shiveshwarkar, The Pictures o f the Chaurapanchasika, pi. v; Khandalavala, 
"The Mrigavat of Bharat Kala Bhavan," pi. vi. 



228. 

BHAIRAVA RAGA 

From a Ragamala (Garland of Melody) series 
Chunar, Bundi school, dated 1591 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: ll'/ 2 X 7Vh in. (29.1 x 18.6 cm.) 
Miniature: 10 X 6 l /n in. (25.5 X 15.7 cm.) 
Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
(I.S. 40-1981) 



The god Shiva, besmeared with ashes, takes his ease with two ladies in a 
palace by night in this particularly intense and powerful version of one of 
the musical modes, the Bhairava raga. The mood of the raga combines terror, 
grandeur, seriousness, and awe-inspiring adoration. It should be performed 
in autumn, before sunrise. While following the usual iconography, the artists 
have underscored Shiva's severe asceticism and power and stressed his 
meditative aspect. Seemingly illumined from within, the god sits on a cush- 
ion of lotus petals beneath the skin of the flayed elephant Nila (the Blue 



342 



228 t> 



One), whom he had slaughtered in his aspect as Bhairava (the Destroyer). 
His tiger pelt is tied by coiled snakes, and his knot of hair resembles his 
attribute, the lingam, from which emerges a small profile of a woman 
— visualized, perhaps, through his concentration. Shiva's expression is radiant, 
his third eye prominently crowned by the young moon. He wears a necklace 
of severed heads, and he plays the vina to an elegantly dressed lady, perhaps 
Parvati, who offers him pan (ground betel nut wrapped in a leaf). Both she 
and the chauri bearer are rapturously attentive. 

The setting is royal and romantic. Facing a courtyard with a small pool 
and fountain with paddling ducks, Shiva and his devotees occupy a chamber 
rich with decorative carvings and tiles, golden vessels, gilded ornaments, and 
sumptuous textiles, including a carpet with floral arabesques. A peacock 
struts on the roof in front of a small pavilion, with chhatris at either side. 

Although the mood of the picture is strongly devotional and Hindu, 
many of its elements are not. The duck pond, carpet, arabesque ornament, 
and tiles are standard furniture in Mughal and Safavid painting; and the 
palpable roundness of limbs, the heavily modeled, convincingly three- 
dimensional architecture, and the extreme fineness of handling all stem from 
Mughal prototypes. This is fully consistent with the history of the series to 
which this miniature, with its unusually rich borders, belongs. The last folio 
is inscribed in blue Nasta c liq script stating that it was completed at the time 
of midday prayer on February 25, 1591, at Chunar by "the pupils of Mir 
Sayyid c Ali and c Abd as-Samad, the slaves Shaikh Husain and Shaikh c Ali 
and Shaikh Hatim, sons of Shaikh Phul Chishti." 1 When it was discovered 
that the raos of Bundi maintained a palace at Chunar, which adjoined Banaras, 
it became clear that the series must have been painted there for Rao Bhoj 
Singh of Bundi (see no. 245), one of Emperor Akbar's officers. 2 One could 
hardly cite a more dramatic instance of cultural and religious integration. 
This Bhairava raga, one of the most burningly devotional of Rajput paintings, 
whose iconography seems to have been established at Bundi, is not only the 
work of a Muslim artist, or artists, trained under formerly Safavid masters 
at Fatehpur-Sikri but is by the son, or sons, of a Muslim saint! 

1. Skelton, "Shaykh Phul," has suggested that Shaikh Phul is the same saint of the 
Chishti order portrayed in Shaikh Phul in His Hermitage (no. 140). 

2. For the 1591 Ragamala series, see: Beach, Rajput Painting at Bundi and Kota, p. 9; 
Welch, "Review of Bundi Painting by P. Chandra," p. 295n; Welch and Beach, 
Gods, Thrones, and Peacocks, pp. 33, 116, pi. 5; Welch, A Flower from Every Meadow, 
pp. 40-41, no. 17. 

Published: The Indian Heritage, p. 57, no. 138; Topsfield, An Introduction to Indian 
Court Painting, pp. 33-34, pi. 21. 



229. 

ELEPHANTS AND WATER SPIRITS 
From a manuscript of the Gajendra Moksha 
(The Deliverance of the Elephant King 
Gajendra) 

Probably Ajmer, ca. 1640 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 8Yh x 12 in. (21.3 x 30.5 cm.) 
Miniature: 7 3 / 4 X ll'/ 2 in. (19.7 X 29.2 cm.) 
Collection Jagdish Goenka, Bombay (160) 



Beneath the three summits of Mount Trikuta — one gold, another silver, 
the third iron — was a tranquil lake often visited by the elephant king and his 
herd. As described in the Gajendra Moksha (The Deliverance of the Elephant 
King Gajendra), an episode from the Bhagavata Purana, the valley was a 
resort of sportive siddhas (semidivine sky dwellers), gandhavras (heavenly 
musicians), kinnaras (horse-headed choristers of the firmament), apsaras 
(heavenly nymphs), and mighty sea serpents. Music played constantly, and 
celestial damsels made a playground of a nearby garden. Life was idyllic. 
But unknown to the carefree elephants, lurking in the water's depths was a 
crocodile demon who entangled the king in his tentacles and tried to drown 
him. For a millennium a battle raged between these well-matched forces of 
good and evil; it ended only when the god Vishnu, at last fearful of the 
outcome, interrupted his life of ease. He stepped from his throne, mounted 
Garuda (his half-bird, half-man vehicle), swooped down to the lake, and 
calmly spun a quoit, which — as the elephant king sank toward death — cut 
off the monster's head. 

Few Rajput pictures are so liltingly paradisiacal. Within the deep blue 
strip of sky one senses the presence of the heavenly beings, while below we 
share the splashing and trumpeting of the king and of his wives and babes in 
the luminous lake. The master artist of this well-known series may have 



344 




come from Ahmadnagar in the Deccan (see no. 191). Attentively observant, 
and appreciative of the comical similarities between elephants' tails and trunks, 
he was above all an inventive colorist. The restrained palette — light blue 
water, deep blue sky, darkish gray elephants, and yellow-green shore and 
rocky islands, set within bright red borders — is touched off by the small 
electrifying charges of mint-fresh green lotus and parrots. 1 

1. For the painting from the same series showing Vishnu's destruction of the crocodile 
demon, see: Welch and Beach, Gods, Thrones, and Peacocks, pi. 13. 

Published: Khandalavala, Chandra, and Chandra, Miniature Painting, pp. 57-58, 
no. 142a-d, fig. 99. 

Following the crisp formulas of painting from the so-called Malwa tradi- 
tion of Central India, a stage has been set for carefully categorized lovers: 
black sky and slate blue landscape, white horizon line, dead white platform, 
trees growing like candy canes and feathers and inhabited by rowdy monkeys, 
and a peacock crying for its mate. Perhaps in emulation of artists of the 
Mughal court, Sukhadeva and several other artists employed by the Rajputs 
at this time foreswore their wonted anonymity and proudly inscribed their 
names on the backs of pictures. Sukhadeva deserved to be pleased by his 
series of illustrations to the Rasabeli of the early seventeenth-century poet 
Puhkara. In this one the stodgy monotonies of Malwa painting suddenly 
come to life. His brush danced dots, blobs, dashes, and long runs, in colors 
subtle as those of Japanese lacquer painters. Spiny accents of yellow and red 



230. 

THE BELOVED WHO PROPOSES LOVE 
By Sukhadeva 

From a manuscript of the Rasabeli of Puhkara 
(folio 12) 

Perhaps Bundelkhand, Malwa school, ca. 1660 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 9Vh x 7V4 in. (25.1 X 18.4 cm.) 
Miniature: Wi x 6 3 A in. (24.1 x 17.2 cm.) 
National Museum, New Delhi 
(51.63/14) 



345 




230 



enflame his dark green trees like a burning wind and transmit blue heat to 
the small figures. The hero, resembling a butterfly that has just alighted on a 
white rose, stands, sword in hand, blue as Krishna, and crowned with the 
god's peacock plumes. Either he awaits words from his nayika or he responds 
incredulously to those just spoken. For, unlike most heroines, she has taken 
the active role and proposed her love to him. Subtle Sukhadeva understood 
— and characterized her appropriately, with assertive gestures and a charm- 
ing but knife-edged profile, and wearing a partly veiled bold-striped garment. 

This picture represents seventeenth-century Central Indian painting at 
a slightly postclassical moment, when traces of far earlier, earthier gusto, 
reminiscent of the Hamza-nama (no. 91), are still evident in the patterned 
vitality of the trees. But the style here achieves a peak of synthesizing 
refinement, as seen in the fineness of the brush work, the artfully controlled 
palette, and the individualized characterizations. Rooted in the indigenous 
Hindu tradition, the Central Indian schools responded strongly to sultanate 
painting traditions, which they soon absorbed; and in the present miniature, 
Sukhadeva reveals a further cautious acceptance of Mughal ways. 

Published: Krishna, Mahva Painting, pi. 18. 



"O mother, my whole being is in love with Biharilal [Lord Krishna]!" So 
wrote the blind poet Surdas (ca. 1483-1563), who lived in Agra and devoted 
his life to composing devotional songs in praise of the god Krishna. His 
words are inscribed on this blazing picture, in which Krishna plays the flute 
and leaps into the air with the gopis to the tune of trumpet, shahnai, cymbal, 
and drum. To express Surdas's plaintive ecstasy, the artist has frozen motion 
and sound, translating roars, thuds, clangs, and toots into silhouetted pat- 
terns of flagrant reds, oranges, yellows, blues, and greens. The artist very 
nearly splits our ears through our eyes. 

Like Sukhadeva, who worked in the Malwa tradition (see no. 230), this 
painter transcended a style that normally falls flat. Mewar, too, had evolved 
its own variant of the early Indian tradition, and because of the firm resis- 
tance of Rana Pratap Singh (r. 1572-97) to Akbar's expansionism, its art 
remained free from Mughal influences well into the seventeenth century. 
Mcwar's rulers, bearing the title of rana (rather than raja, rai, or rao) and 
tracing their ancestry to the sun, were the senior ranking Rajputs. For a 
quarter of a century, Rana Pratap Singh waged guerrilla warfare against 
Akbar. In 1576, the Mughals, combining forces with the rajas of Marwar 
and Amber, among others, and led by Akbar himself, drove Rana Pratap and 
his twenty-two thousand Rajputs to the rugged Aravalli Hills. Terrible slaughter 
ensued on the Plain of Haldighat. At last, with only eight thousand Rajputs 
still alive, the golden sun, symbol of Mewar, was seized from the rana and 
carried off. Ironically, the raja bearing the golden booty was killed, while 
Rana Pratap, on his great war-horse Chetak, made his legendary leap across 
a mountain stream to safety — and to prepare for the spring campaigns. 

Although his followers were decimated and his capitals seized, the rana 
continued to resist the Mughals. His son, Rana Amar Singh I (r. 1597-1620), 
consolidated the state and maintained its independence against Emperor 
Jahangir, although his heir, Karan Singh (r. 1620-28), was later a welcome 
visitor to the Mughal court. Jahangir's friendly feelings toward him sur- 
vived an episode that would otherwise have sparked imperial wrath. When 
Prince Khurram (later Shah Jahan) revolted against his father, the rana pro- 
vided sanctuary. Indeed, on the death of Jahangir, it was in Udaipur, the 
capital of Mewar, that the prince was first hailed as emperor. Shah Jahan 
later restored parts of Mewar long held by the Mughals to Rana Jagat Singh 
(r. 1628-52). During his reign, the arts of peace flourished at Mewar. As in 
Shah Jahan's palaces, marble was lavished upon Jagnivas Palace on Lake 
Pichola, and ecstatic paintings such as this one were painted in reflection of 
newfound tranquillity. 



231. 

THE DANCE OF KRISHNA 
From a manuscript of the Sur-Sagar of Surd 
Rajasthan, Mewar, mid-17th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 11 X 8% in. 
(27.9 x 22 cm.) 

Collection Gopi Krishna Kanoria, Patna 
(VK.117) 



Published: M. Chandra, Mewar Painting, pi. 3. 



347 




< 231, detail 



349 




232 



A "second paradise," a poetical phrase for India, could refer to the bower 
of bliss around the lovers Rama and Sita. At last they are again together 
after the heroic adventures following Sita's abduction by the demonic tyrant 
Ravana (see no. 13). Rocks become pink clouds, and greenery and blossoms 
sprout from nowhere, giving form to the lovers' beatitude in this lyrical and 
unique picture by an unknown artist perhaps from Raghugarh (see no. 251). 
The thin line of white froth edging the lake, the cranes, the outlines of the 
trees, and the bursts of flowers tremble with expectation; Rama and Sita, 
whom the poetic master has joined in a central splotch of yellow, inhabit the 
picture's only zone of calm. 



232. 

RAMA AND SITA 
Rajasthan, perhaps Raghugarh, 
ca. 1740 

Opaque watcrcolor on paper 

Folio: 12-V4 x 8 7 /« in. (32.4 x 22.5 cm.) 

Miniature: ll'/n X IV2 in. (28.3 X 19.1 cm. 

National Museum, New Delhi 

(51.34/50) 



That arms and armor should be viewed as sculpture is impressively dem- 
onstrated by this unusual helmet, artfully hammered into the form of an 
immaculately tied turban and ornamented with floral arabesques. 1 Unfor- 
tunately, there are no acquisition dates for it or for the accompanying shield, 
which is decorated with the same finely scaled, textilelike ornament in gold. 
On the basis of style, provenance, and sheer opulence, we can assume that 
they belonged to Raja Jai Singh of Amber (r. 1625-67). Known as the Mirza 
Raja, he served the Mughal emperor Aurangzeb, who elevated him to the 



233. 

HELMET AND SHIELD 
Perhaps Agra, 2nd half of 17th century 
Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, 
Jaipur (2.3620) 




351 



a. HELMET 

5'/2X7y4in. (14 x 19.7 cm.) 
Steel with koftgari work in gold 

b. SHIELD 

Diameter 18 in. (45.7 cm.) 
Steel with koftgari work in gold 



mansab of 6,000 horse and may have given him these superb objects. The 
emperor was well pleased with Raja Jai Singh on two counts: he betrayed 
the emperor's rival, Prince Dara-Shikoh, during the wars of succession, 
thereby easing Aurangzeb's way to the throne; and he also captured the Maratha 
leader, Shivaji, and brought him to the imperial court. Later, however, on 
learning that the emperor had broken a pledge to his prisoner, Jai Singh, in a 
characteristic display of Rajput chivalrousness and independence, enabled 
Shivaji to escape. Proud to the point of vainglory because of his presumed 
control over Mughals and Marathas alike, Jai Singh so angered the emperor 
that a plot was hatched against him. Aurangzeb promised the throne of 
Amber to Kirat Singh, the raja's younger son, if he would kill his father. He 
did so, at Burhanpur in the Deccan, by poisoning his father's opium; but the 
contemptuous emperor rewarded him not with Amber but with the small 
district of Kama. 

The shield is lined with an unusual Italian ciselc velvet of about 1620 to 
1650, handsomely decorated with flowers in a pattern that would have ap- 
pealed to Mughal taste. Still attached is the embroidered seventeenth-century 
knuckle pad, which protected the hand of the bearer against the mighty 
blows sustained in battle. 



1. There is an Indian helmet in turban form in the Musee de l'Armee, Pans, and 
another in the Archaeological Museum, Bijapur. 

Published: Welch, The Art of Mughal India, pp. 123, 172, no. 69; The Indian Heritage, 
p. 138, no. 456. 





234 



234. 

KNUCKLE PAD FROM A SHIELD 

Amber, mid-17th century 

Cotton, embroidered with silk and metallic 

thread, 5Vi X 5V2 in. (14 X 14 cm.) 

Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 

(1352) 



At Mughal and Rajput courts, small, seemingly trivial objects, rarely if 
ever viewed, were often as beautiful to see and touch as larger, more visible 
ones. This knuckle pad represents weeks, if not months, of painstaking and 
imaginative embroidering. It is tempting to believe that the maker was an 
amateur, some Rajput lady who lavished her devotion on stitching the colorful 
arabesques of this small object intended for her soldierly lover. More likely, 
it was made by a special craftsman who spent his life sewing, day in and 
day out, as had his father and his father's father. 



352 



This tender lotus bud of the battlefield springs open to reveal a threaten- 
ing foliation of sharp spikes. Mughals and Rajputs, it seems, encouraged 
deadly flights of fancy from their armorers, who concealed daggers within 
swords, fashioned blades that spread apart inside the victim's gut, and fitted 
pistol barrels to the sides of dagger blades. Another cherished invention was 
the tiger claw, steel talons to be concealed in the palm of the hand and used 
to rip the flesh from an enemy's face. 



235. 

MACE IN THE FORM OF A LOTUS BUD 

Rajasthan, perhaps Amber, 

3rd quarter of 17th century 

Steel, length 24 in. (61 cm.) 

Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 

(928) 



One could not imagine a more powerfully Rajput dagger. Heavy, sharp, 
and well fitted to the hand, this imaginatively composed khanjar required 
most of the armorer's technical skills to create. The massive blade of wa- 
tered steel, with an armor-piercing tip, is carved in low relief with what 
seems to be a collision between a horseman and an elephant on one face and 
a tiger hunt on the other. Tiger and elephant masks snarl and roar on the 
quillon and pommel of the hilt, the grip of which resembles entwining 
ropes, or cobras. Final touches of gold koftgari work enrich the finial and 
other parts of the hilt. 

Although the form recalls the Akbar period dagger of about 1585 (no. 
98), the carving of the blade suggests a later date, perhaps as late as 1670. 



236. 

KHANJAR 

Rajasthan, perhaps Kotah, 17th century 
Watercdsteel, withkoftgari work in gold, length 
12Y8 in. (31.3 cm.) 

Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
(I.S. 86-1981) 



Published: The Indian Heritage, p. 131, no. 421. 



237. 

TWO MATCHLOCKS 

a. MATCHLOCK 

Probably Rajasthan, late 17th century 
Steel barrel with koftgari work; stalk of ebony 
inlaid with mother-of-pearl and silver, length 
39Y4 in. (101cm.) 

Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 
(1230) 



The first guns were matchlocks, which appeared in Europe in the fifteenth 
century and thence spread to India, where they were first used in the six- 
teenth century. Their mechanism is simple: the guns are fired by pulling a 
trigger which in turn releases a movable arm (serpentine) carrying a lighted 
cloth fuse impregnated with wax (match) into a small pan of fine black 
gunpowder. The flame then enters the barrel through a drilled touchhole, 
setting off a reserve of coarser powder. Because they fire less promptly than 




237a 



238a 




238b 



flintlocks, which evolved from the matchlock, their long barrels were usu- 
ally rested on stands, or on the shoulders of obliging huntsmen. Slow acting 
and awkward, matchlocks were ill-suited to pitched battle, but they were 
fired at approaching enemies. They were particularly valued in the hunting 
field, and can be found in miniatures as early as about 1540. A portrait of 
Akbar in old age (no. 113) includes an imperial example, suitable for hunting, 
with a polychromed green stock; and Emperor Aurangzeb employs a 
matchlock to shoot nilgai in one of the most explicit Mughal hunting scenes 
(no. 176). 

Like other Rajput arms, matchlocks were artistically pleasing objects, 
as attractive to the eye as to the hand. Barrels were made from watered steel, 
sometimes gilded or carved in relief with flowers or arabesques, and stocks 
were polychromed and inlaid with ivory birds, trees, and flowers. The com- 
paratively spare and compact Jaipur gun appears to be the earlier of the two. 
The Figiel matchlock is the most sumptuous we have seen, and it retains the 
original kit of tools for loading, suspended from chains near the pan. 



Weapons were enjoyable as well as serious matters in Rajput households. 
The scaled-down matchlock (a), ideal for shooting small game, must have 
delighted the heart of a Rajput boy or girl, for whom it would also have 
been an invitation to join in the adult activity of hunting. Already, however, 
he or she might have been given the miniature matchlock (b), examples of 
which can be seen in Rajput paintings among the toys of young members of 
the warrior caste. 

Published: Welch, The Art of Mughal India, pp. 145, 173, no. 73. 



b. MATCHLOCK 

Probably Rajasthan, ca. 1700 
Watered steel barrel; stock inlaid with ivory; 
gold ornament, length 66 in. (167.6 cm.) 
Collection Leo S. Figiel, Atlantis, Florida 



238. 

TWO MATCHLOCKS 

a. MATCHLOCK FOR A CHILD 
Marwar or Amber, early 18th century 

Steel with paint and gilt; rosewood, with paint 
and ivory inlay, length 35 in. (88.9 cm.) 
Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 
(295) 

b. MINIATURE MATCHLOCK 
Amber or Jaipur, early 18th century 
Rosewood, ebony, and steel damascened with 
gold, length 9 7 /h in. (25 cm.) 

Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 
(2302) 



< 237b, detail 



355 



239. These unique arrows, with blunt points carved with deer heads, were 

FOUR ARROWS WITH IVORY POINTS intended either to stun small game or as "hunting magic, " to lure game into 

IN THE FORM OF DEER HEADS the f ie ld. They were probably made for one of the most ardent of Kotah 

Rajasthan, Kotah, mid-18th century hunters, Maharao Durjansal (r. 1723-56). According to Lieutenant Colonel 
Average length 29 in (73. 7 cm.) Tod he usual] ln f ormatlve author of Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, 

Rao Madho Singh Museum Trust, Kotah ■> ti ,. • , , „ , . r , . , , „ ■ 

(1419_1422) " e was a va l iant pnnce, and possessed all the qualities or which the Rajput 

is enamoured: affability, generosity, and bravery. He was devoted to field 
sports, especially the royal one of tiger-hunting; and he had ramnas, or 
preserves, in every corner of his dominions (some of immense extent, with 
ditches and palisadoes, and sometimes circumvallations), in all of which he 
erected hunting-seats." 1 

Numerous paintings and drawings have survived from Rao Durjansal's 
reign, many of them depicting the hunt. Some attest to his innovative ap- 
proaches to both art and the chase. A sketch, for instance, depicts him watch- 
ing as a huntsman, hidden behind a musician playing the soothing melodies 
of a vina, stalks a deer. 2 

1. Tod, Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, vol. 3, p. 1530. 

2. Private collection. 






This lethal sculpture, auspiciously shaped like a stylized makara, fired its 
charge from a fire-breathing muzzle. Now pacified by a cannonball wedged 
in its maw, it is usually assigned an honored, ceremonial post on the ram- 
parts of the magnificent Jodhpur Fort. 

The makara is one of India's most ancient symbolic images, harking 
back more than two thousand years to a time when the natural world was 
seen as both symbol and reality and fantastic creatures were invented to 
express the complexity of nature. Traditionally, festoons and strings of pearls 
poured forth from the gaping mouth of this crocodilian monster of the 
primeval waters, symbolizing the potent abundance of the sea. The motif 
has adorned the headdresses, earrings, armbands, and hip belts of countless 
Hindu gods and decorated the columns, brackets, lintels, and ceilings of the 
temples that house them. Its use for a cannon is at once strikingly original 
and a reminder of India's rich and ancient storehouse of memory. 



240. 

CANNON IN THE SHAPE OF A MAKARA 
Rajasthan, Marwar, Jodhpur, 
late 18th century 

Bronze, length 49 in. (124.5 cm.), diameter 
12 in. (30.5 cm.) 

Mehrangarh Museum Trust, Fort, Jodhpur, 
on loan from Maharaja Sri Gaj Singhji II of 
Jodhpur (LI 7/1 874) 



In 1657, while serving Shah Jahan against Aurangzeb in the wars of succession, 
five Kotah brothers, wearing saffron-stained robes and bridegrooms' crowns 
dedicating them to victory or death, rode into battle. Only one survived. 
Following that proud but tragic day, Rao Jagat Singh (r. 1657-70) received 
the mansab of two thousand men from Aurangzeb, the very man responsi- 
ble for the family tragedy. Like many Rajputs, Rao Jagat served in the Deccan, 
where he hired a brilliant artist, whom we have dubbed the Kotah Master, 
the painter of this animated portrait in which the prince's ardent spirits are 
symbolized by the preening, leonine sarus crane in the left foreground. In 
the center of the composition, Jagat, seated on a marble platform and 
surrounded by ladies and flowers, is the quintessence of a Rajput nobleman 
at leisure. 

The artist so finely attuned to Rao Jagat was trained at Golconda in a 
draftsmanlike tradition that can be traced back to fifteenth-century Tabriz, 
ancestral home of the Qutb-Shahi dynasty of Golconda. From its beginnings, 
the Golconda school referred through drawings and tracings to earlier Iranian 
motifs and also maintained contact with the evolving newer modes, invaria- 



241. 

RAO JAGAT SINGH OF KOTAH IN A 
GARDEN 

Attributed to the Kotah Master 
Rajasthan, Kotah, ca. 1670 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 10% X 7 in. 
(27x17.8 cm.) 

The Kncllington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



357 




241 



bly emphasizing excellence of drawing. When innovative Iranian artists such 
as Riza-yi c Abbasi spun sinuous calligraphic lines and painted with spring- 
fresh colors at Isfahan for Shah c Abbas I, Golconda artists usually followed 
suit. And when Rajputs with a penchant for art saw these Golconda variants 
on the Iranian mode, they invited the artists to join their ateliers. Thus, the 
heritage of Iran and of Golconda reached Kotah and enriched one of the 
memorable Rajput schools. 

Although Rao Jagat spent most of his time in the Deccan, he kept in 
touch with his feudatory in Rajasthan, and probably visited it for extended 
periods. Accompanying him, his newfound artist became familiar with Rajput 
ways and places; and with Rao Jagat's encouragement, the Kotah Master 
painted the jungles, lions, tigers, and elephants of Rajasthan with the surg- 
ing line once devoted to Iranian dragons, demons, and simurghs. 

Published: Dickson and Welch, The Houghton Shahnameh, vol. 1, p. 233, fig. 282; 
Welch, "Return to Kotah," pp. 79-81, figs. 5, 6. 



Frayed from too frequent handling, the rhinoceros's mask lost, and the 
elephant's hind leg replaced, this picture nevertheless outpaces all other Rajput 
hunting pictures. Like the portrait of Rao Jagat (no. 241), it can be assigned 
to the Kotah Master, who continued to work for Kotah princes long after 
Jagat's death in 1670. During the reigns of Rao Kishor Singh (1670-86) and 
Rao Ram Singh (1686-1707), both of whom fought and died for the Mughal 
cause in the Deccan, the master expanded his repertoire to suit Rajput and, 
particularly, Kotah taste. 

Paradoxically, hunting scenes, which had been a Kotah specialty since 
the state was founded under Rao Madho Singh (r. 1625—49), were invigo- 
rated by his Iranian finesse. Unlike his Turkman precursors who never saw the 
dragons they rendered so believably, he knew firsthand the pounding rush 
of elephants. More powerfully than Basawan's (see no. 88), his riptide line 



242. 

RAO RAM SINGH I OF KOTAH 

HUNTING A RHINOCEROS 

Attributed to the Kotah Master 

Rajasthan, Kotah, ca. 1690 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 12% X 18>4 in. 

(32.1 X 47.6 cm.) 

Collection Stuart Cary Welch 




242 



charted hulking muscle and bone inside scratchy hide, enabling us to feel the 
thud of feet and the lashing of ropes, and to hear the clang of bells. 

Published: Lee, Rajput Painting, cover, p. 45, pi. 36; Welch and Beach, Gods, Thrones, 
and Peacocks, pp. 43, 120, no. 27, pi. 27; Beach, Rajput Painting at Bundi and Kota, pp. 
32-33, pis. lxvii, fig. 71, pi. lxviii, fig. 72 (det.); Welch, "Return to Kotah," pp. 
79-80, fig. 4. 



243. 

THE RANI'S SOUTH AMERICAN 
MONKEY 

Rajasthan, Mcwar, ca. 1700 

Opaque watercolor on paper, IV/3 X 22 in. 

(44.5 X 55.9 cm.) 

Collection Stuart Cary Welch 



The prehensile tail indicates that this monkey can be traced to South America. 
According to an inscription on the back of the painting, it was given by a 
Muslim nobleman to the rani (wife) of Rana Amar Singh II of Mewar 
(r. 1698-1710). As always, the history of politics and art mesh. Amar Singh II's 
father, Jai Singh, married a princess from the Rajput state of Bundi, who 
bore him Amar Singh. As so often happened in Rajput households, she was 
replaced in Jai Singh's affections by a second wife, who jealously conspired 
against the rightful heir. Strained relations between father and son worsened 
when young Amar Singh (playfully?) turned loose an enraged elephant in 
the streets of Udaipur. Unwilling to face his father's anger, the prince fled to 
Bundi, where he gathered a force of ten thousand men to attack his father. 
His army included many disillusioned noblemen of Mewar, who had suf- 
fered from Rana Jai Singh's indolence and imbecility. Inasmuch as three- 
quarters of the father's subjects joined the son's cause, Rana Jai saw that he 



would be unable to crush the rebellion and proposed that Amar Singh main- 
tain a separate court in exile until the end of his reign. 

Cut off from his father, young Amar Singh became enmeshed in Mughal 
politics, sporadically supporting and undermining the cause of Prince 
Mu c azzam, one of Emperor Aurangzeb's sons, during the wars of succession. 
Despite the bitterness felt by many Rajputs toward Aurangzeb, Amar Singh 
signed a treaty with the Mughals once Prince Mu c azzam was established as 
Emperor Bahadur Shah I. And although harassed by the Rajputs, the em- 
peror (whose mother was a Rajput princess) usually attempted to smooth 
relations with them. We suspect that one of his noblemen bestowed the 
exotic and handsome monkey upon Amar Singh's wife. 

Zoos were among the pleasures of Mughal emperors, and the rani's 
monkey may have belonged to a simian dynasty maintained in the imperial 
gardens of Delhi. Certainly, the picture's artistic prototypes were the animal 
studies made by Mansur and others for Emperor Jahangir's albums (see nos. 
141-44). 

Published: Welch and Beach, Gods, Thrones, and Peacocks, pp. 47, 120, no. 26, pi. 26. 



Large miniatures are rare in Indian art, and this panoramic battle scene 
— showing Bahadur Shah I (r. 1707-12) fighting against Maratha marauders 
in the aftermath of his defeat of his younger brother Kam Bakhsh — is unique. 
Swarming with men, horses, elephants, camels, bullocks, cannon, and rockets, 
the picture is divided by its three principal artists into three sections, in each 
of which only the major figures and their immediate entourages are re- 
corded in the glory of full color. Everyone else is masterfully drawn in lean 
black line, occasionally highlighted with gold and modeled in grisaille washes. 
However fierce the subject, the pervading tone is orderly, the composition 
stitched together by the repeated diagonals of cannon, rockets, and spears, 
and effervescently dotted with round black shields. At the center of the 
Mughal armies, Bahadur Shah remains crisply aloof as he advances through 
the din. 

Following the death of his ancient father, Aurangzeb, in 1707, the sixty- 
three-year-old Prince Mu c azzam crowned himself emperor as Bahadur Shah I, 
unaware that the empire was crumbling. Wars of succession followed, 
embroiling most of Mughal and Rajput India. After his long wait for power, 
Bahadur Shah optimistically led armies from Lahore to Delhi and Agra and 
across the Narmada River into the Deccan, invariably bettering his ambitious 
but less effective brothers. When Prince A c zam and his troops reached Agra 
Fort to seize the Mughal treasury, Bahadur Shah had already taken it. A 
soldier to the core, he is said to have spent only four nights in palaces (the 
rest of the time in tents) during the five years of his reign. 

But Bahadur Shah's troubles were not over. While he was defeating 
Prince A c zam, Raja Ajit Singh of Marwar, eager to avenge Aurangzeb's 
vendetta against his family, attacked the imperial territories near Ajmer. 
Bahadur Shah again swooped into action, disciplining recalcitrant Rajputs 
with sword and diplomacy. After his armies had vanquished Ajit Singh at 
Merta, he forgave the rebel and elevated him to the rank of maharaja with a 
mansab of 3,500 horse. 

Another Rajput rebellion sprouted just as the busy emperor was setting 
off for the Deccan to fight against his sinister brother Kam Bakhsh. The 
rebellion was led by Rana Amar Singh II of Mewar and by the patron of this 
giant battle scene, Sawai Jai Singh Kachhwaha. They brazenly killed the 
Mughal commandant of Mewar and seized Amber, which Bahadur Shah 
had recently — and annoyingly — bestowed upon Sawai Jai Singh's loyal 
younger brother. 

Sensing that the Rajput troubles could wait, Bahadur Shah marched 
toward Hyderabad, where he offered peaceful terms to Kam Bakhsh, who 
rejected them even though most of his army had deserted. Deluded with 
notions of god-given invincibility, Kam Bakhsh led his sons and a small 
force against the imperial armies. The battle depicted in this panorama was 



244. 

EMPEROR BAHADUR SHAH I IN 
BATTLE 

Inscribed: "a battle between Emperor 
Bahadur Shah against Purushottam Das 
Surhwaja and Sangaji Inglia of the Deccan," 
"painted by Gopal, Jivan, and Udai" 
Rajasthan, Amber, early 18th century 
Tinted drawing on paper, 8 ft. 11 in. x 32'/? in. 
(2.72 m. x 8.6 cm.) 

Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 
(AG-1401) 



361 




244, detail 





fought on January 13, 1709. Rockets and arrows pierced the air. Kani Bakhsh 
was wounded at once. Streaming blood, he stormed on his elephant into 
the melee, firing arrows with demonic vigor until he was so weakened that 
he was surrounded and captured. Sixty-two bodies were found riddled by 
his arrows. 

After Kam Bakhsh's downfall, Marathas entered the field, eager lor 
loot; and they, too, were defeated by the imperial armies. Apparently, this 
stage of the battle is shown here. Later, Kam Bakhsh was brought in a 
palanquin to the emperor, who lamented the triumph over one so close. Sur- 
geons were summoned, and Bahadur Shah himself washed dried blood from 
the wounds and put a cup of rosewater to his brother's lips. A few hours 
later, Kam Bakhsh died. 

By May 1710, Bahadur Shah had returned to Rajasthan, determined to 
defeat the Rajput alliance; but before his armies had massed, word arrived 
of a more urgent problem — a Sikh uprising in the Punjab. Again the Rajput 
challenge went unresolved. Charity and forgiveness were substituted for 
war: the pleased but suspicious Rajputs were sent back to their states bear- 

ing glftS ' 

Bahadur Shah's afflictions were unending. Exhausted but still winning 
skirmishes against the Sikhs, he died at the age of sixty-nine in 1712. Perhaps, 
on learning the news, Sawai Jai Singh called for this panorama of battle, and 
pondered the portrait of his generous enemy, whose life was drained away 
by a succession of victories. 



364 



With the airy grace of a ballet dancer, Rao Bhoj Singh of Bundi (r. 1585-1607) 
flicks a deadly arrow into the flank of a splendid lion, who snarls in death as 
he is followed by his sleek, saddened mate. The Kotah Master (see also nos. 
241, 242) flourished in Rajasthan, where he accompanied the rulers on their 
daily rounds and in the hunting field, watched elephant combats, fished in 
the Chambal River, and established a brilliantly lively atelier that was to 
survive into the nineteenth century. Like his followers, he sketched every- 
thing that caught his eye; and in his finished pictures he combined portraits 
and animal studies from life with motifs inherited from a line of talented 
draftsmen that can be traced to Golconda and eventually to fifteenth-century 
Iran. 

This historical subject — it shows an ancestor common to Bundi and 
Kotah who had served Akbar at the siege of Ahmadnagar — was commis- 
sioned toward the end of the master's career, when his expressive line had 
become more calligraphic, with pronounced thickenings and thinnings. In 
its dynamically lunging men and animals and its surging greenery, the artist 
synthesized his experience of lions, the jungle, and the Rajputs with his 
own ancient heritage, which included (unknown to him) lions that still 
snarl on Assyrian and Achaemenid stone reliefs. 

Published: Welch and Beach, Gods, Thrones, and Peacocks, p. 48, no. 31; Beach, Rajput 
Painting at Bundi and Kota, pp. 35-37, pi. lxxxi, fig. 86, pi. lxxviii, fig. 87 (dot.); 
Dickson and Welch, The Houghton Shahnameh, vol. 1, p. 233, figs. 283, 284; Welch, 
"Return to Kotah," p. 85, figs. 9, 10. 




245. 

RAO BHOJ SINGH OF BUNDI SLAYS 
A LION 

Attributed to the Kotah Master 

Rajasthan, Kotah, ca. 1720 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 18>4 X 26 in. 

(47.6 X 66 cm.) 

Collection Stuart Cary Welch 



Overleaf, 245, detail t> 



Luxuriously precious with attached pearls and jewels — a Mughal practice 
(see no. 154) — this likeness of the Rajput patriarch Rana Sangram Singh II 
of Mewar (r. 1710-34) is also a searching characterization of an accom- 
plished, successful ruler. His name means Lion of Battle, and he was admired 
as a powerful, just, and inflexible king who took advantage of the weaken- 
ing Mughal empire to regain long lost territories. 

Even when his political authority was fading, Emperor Muhammad 
Shah — Rangila, the Pleasure Loving (see no. 182) — was artistically influential. 
Had he not flung pearls with such princely abandon in Delhi, they would 
not have landed so pleasingly in Udaipur. 




246 



368 



246. 

RANA SANGRAM SINGH II OF MEWAR 
Rajasthan, Mewar, Udaipur, ca. 1725-35 
Opaque watercolor on paper, set with pearls 
and precious stones, 16-Kt X 1 VA in. 
(42.6x29.9 cm.) 

Collection Gopi Krishna Kanoria, Patna 
(VK.117) 




"The domestic incidents of this, as of the preceding reigns, are without 
interest." So wrote Lieutenant Colonel James Tod on the subject of the 
maharaja painted here. Why? Because, we suspect, Zorawar Singh of Bikaner 
(r. 1736-45) spent most of his days at home. Geographically remote and 
insulated by the Thar Desert, Bikaner played little part in the imbroglios of 
Mughal power. Its merchants sent their camel caravans to distant trading 
centers, and the maharajas enjoyed their Rajput activities, celebrating festi- 
vals and marriages, looking after their zenanas, leading war parties against 
their neighbors, hunting, and cultivating the arts. 

Maharaja Zorawar Singh's most notable artist was Ustad Murad, to 
whom we assign this hunting scene set beneath the artist's favorite citron 
sky. One of the outstanding Rajput artists, his style became increasingly 
personal over the years. Like the state of Bikaner itself, he turned from 
Mughal to Rajput ways, shedding imperial naturalism in favor of a highly 



247. 

MAHARAJA ZORAWAR SINGH 

HAWKING 

Attributed to Murad 

Rajasthan, Bikaner, ca. 1740 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 9Vi X 6 7 /h in. 

(24.8x17.5 cm.) 

National Museum , New Delhi 

(BKN.35) 



369 



mannered, nostalgic style appropriate to Bikaner's desert vastnesses. His 
vision came from within, and as he aged, figures, animals, and settings 
sweetened into slightly humorous poetic dreams. Serene figures are scaled 
according to whim, from the large and important maharaja to three-quarter- 
sized courtiers and minihuntsmen. Trees are twisted into fruitful candy canes, 
birds fly in arabesques, and horses grow rounder rumps, larger heads, and 
narrower girths and necks to facilitate our appreciation of their sensitive 
expressiveness. 

Published: W. Archer, Indian Miniatures, pi. 45; Brijbhushan, The World of Indian 
Miniatures, pi. 25. 

For other works by this appealing artist, see: Patnaik and Welch, A Second Paradise. 



248. 

A POPPY 

Rajasthan, Kishangarh, ca. 1740 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 7'/« X 4'/h in. 
(18.1 x 10.5 cm.) 

The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 




248 



India's burst of flowers following the monsoon provided an ecstatic, scented 
fanfare to the coming harvests, and inspired dancers, painters, and lovers. 
Although we have rejoiced in Mughal blossoms, burgeoning on costumes 
and across tent walls, Jahangir's and Shah Jahan's floramania was in fact an 
imperializing of ancient forms transmitted to the Mughal court from the 
arts of Rajasthan and the Deccan. This glowing poppy, with chinks of sky 
visible between the petals, was painted at Kishangarh during the reign of 
Raj Singh (r. 1706-48), one of a line of rulers deeply concerned with painting. 

Although one can only speculate upon pre-eighteenth-century Kishangarh 
painting, the style may always have been influenced by Mughal and Deccani 
art. Kishangarh separated from Marwar during the reign of Akbar, and seems 
to have maintained close relations with the imperial court throughout its 
history. Outstanding Kishangarh pictures, however, share few qualities with 
Mughal ones beyond exquisite fineness of finish and lively draftsmanship. If 
Mughal patrons and artists usually viewed the world with sunlit clarity, 
those of Kishangarh preferred a lunar vision, far more extreme and roman- 
tic than imperial art at its most poetic. This small painted flower, more 
mysterious and bewitching than most Mughal ones, exudes the peculiar 
darkling quality that lends fascination to some Kishangarh art and reminds 
us of the poppy's varied uses. Beautiful to the eye, it was also — in the form 
of opium — conducive to lackadaisical states of mind; and it provided the 
deadly element of pousta, the morning quaff forced by imperial order down 
the throats of unwanted Mughal princes locked in Gwalior Fort, easing them 
from rivalry to oblivion. 

But what accounts for the art of Kishangarh's affinities with Mughal 
art? The explanation lies in Raja Rup Singh's (r. 1643-58) close association 
with Shah Jahan, who may have shared with him a taste for the romantic 
and poetic, and must have discussed with him such projects as the Taj 
Mahal and shown him paintings by Govardhan. These experiences, com- 
bined with the dynasty's long-standing intimacy with the Mughal court and 
an inbred penchant for intensely expressive literature and art, provided a 
basis for the Kishangarh pictorial style as we know it from the late seven- 
teenth century onward. 

Although little is known of Kishangarh history, its art reveals very strong 
connections with the Deccan, where Kishangarh princes must have held 
commands in the Mughal army. Indeed, the earliest Kishangarh pictures we 
have seen are by a late seventeenth-century artist trained in the Deccan, who 
soon adjusted his manner to Kishangarh's curious and unique variant of the 
Mughal mode. Perhaps he was trained at Burhanpur, one of the Mughal 
centers in the Deccan and the city where Shah Jahan's favorite wife, Mumtaz- 
Mahal, died in 1631. 

Burhanpur was also famed for its textiles, especially painted cottons, 
such as the magnificent floor spread with decorative but sensitive red pop- 
pies against a white ground (no. 179). So similar are these poppies to the 
painted one that we believe the artist of the miniature was trained at 
Burhanpur, an idea borne out by the equestrian portrait of Atachin Beg 
Bahadur (no. 222), a painting from the Deccan, probably from Burhanpur, 
which could easily be mistaken for Kishangarh work. 



370 




An inscription on the reverse side of the painting identifies the prince as 
Raj Singh, ruler of Kishangarh from 1706 to 1748. Himself an amateur painter, 
he was also a devout follower of the fifteenth-century Vaishnavite sage 
Vallabhacharya, who had propounded the doctrine of Pushtimarga (the Way 
of Grace), which promised salvation through personal devotion to Krishna. 
According to this cult, Krishna was to be clothed in rich garments and wor- 
shiped with ceremonial splendor; his devotees were to bring to him the same 



249. 

PRINCE RESTING AFTER A HUNT 
Inscribed, on reverse: "picture of Maharaj Sri 
Raj Singhji" 

Rajasthan, Kishangarh, ca. 1740 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 8 { A x 12% in. 

(21 X32.1 cm.) 

Collection Gopi Krishna Kanoria, Patna 
(GK.100) 




249, detail 




Krishna and Radha. Rajasthan, Kishangarh, 
mid-18th century. Opaque watercolor on cloth, 
40y 4 X 37 in. (103.5 x 94 cm.). Philadelphia 
Museum of Art 



spirit of love and service (seva) that a wife brings to her husband and dedi- 
cate to him all their material belongings. 

In his efforts to portray Raj Singh as the embodiment of all princely 
virtues, the Kishangarh artist clearly could think of no better way to honor 
his patron than to endow him with the attributes of his own favorite divinities. 
Like Rama, who is often shown holding the bow that he broke in order to 
win the hand of Sita, Raj Singh is portrayed seated and proudly erect, 
demonstrating his prowess with a bow and arrow. Grouped before him, in 
the shade of hauntingly congruent, perfectly balanced trees, is an entourage 
of admiring young women who recall, in their poses of reverence, the 
gopis who serve Lord Krishna. At some distance, two women bathe lan- 
guorously in the lake, their dopattas trailing from the trees, unmistakably 
evoking the popular Vastraharana episode of the Krishna legend (see. no. 
11). The delicate touch of the artist shifts from foliage, to blossom, to flowerlike 
hands, to a decoratively trussed black buck, to the horse, graceful as a swan, 
in this creation of a hunter's paradise. 

Paintings from the reign of Raj Singh's eldest son, Sawant Singh (r. 
1748-64), usually considered the major patron of the Kishangarh school, 
further document prevailing Rajput religiosity and illustrate the truism that 
we interpret our gods according to our personalities and needs. Sawant Singh's 
temperament joined worldliness with fervid religiosity, which inspired him 
to write devotional poetry dedicated to Lord Krishna and to abdicate seven 
years before his death. As a young man, he frequented the court of Emperor 
Muhammad Shah, in whose revels he must have participated. But ultimately, 
the riotous life of the Delhi court led to revulsion; and just as Muhammad 
Shah spent more and more time with Sufis and other devotees at Delhi, so 
did Sawant Singh devote himself to Vaishnavite practices at Kishangarh, 
participating in the sacred releases of the bhakti cult. 

Among the best-known paintings from Sawant Singh's felicitous 
partnerships with his artists arc the many extraordinary portrayals of Krishna 
and Radha. A particularly spectacular example is the large painting on cloth in 
the Philadelphia Museum of Art (left), which expresses Sawant Singh's exqui- 
site worldliness and his spirituality in a highly scented amalgam of extreme 
courtliness and divine passion. In it, traditional Indian artistic ways emerge 
forcibly, as in the metaphorical interpretations of Krishna's leonine waist 
and shoulders and attenuated, sinuous eyes resembling leaves from a pipal tree. 



250. 

BY THE LIGHT OF THE MOON, AND 

FIREWORKS 

Attributed to Nihal Chand 

Inscribed, on reverse: "[a] gathering of the 

uninformed, wine-drinking, restless ones"; in 

Devanagri script, the same words, without 

reference to wine drinking 

Rajasthan, Kishangarh, ca. 1740 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 8V2 X 6Vk in. 

(21.8x15.6 cm.) 

Private collection 



Satire, broad humor, and sexual explicitness enliven Rajput art far more 
frequently than Mughal. In this nocturnal gambol, they are blended with 
such masterful sleight of hand that viewers respond not to the painting's 
"depravity" but to its delicacy of handling. Only resolute study unlocks its 
tongue-in-cheek wickedness and follies: the fat old sot struggling to balance 
both cup and dancing girl — but preferring the former; a lightly attired 
bounding nymphet ringing her bells; perverse ladies enacting the friendly 
vices of the zenana; and a brazen couple of moderate ambiguity demonstrating 
their devotion with the devil-may-care freedom of turtledoves. 

On the marble terrace, scattered with a tasteful still life of largely 
neglected sweetmeats, musical instruments, smashed bottles, and promis- 
ingly full ones, other guests add further spice to the human jumble. Three 
lady musicians, quibbling over a wrong note, screech, tear hair, and wallop 
one another in a vignette that needs only to be seen to be heard. Within the 
eye of the storm, huddled together for reasons left to the imagination, are a 
stonily profiled elderly lady (the genteel wife of the rotund host?), a black 
eunuch, and two disembodied faces so alarming that we avert our glance. 

This miniature, with its biting, Goyesque grotcsquerie and savage humor, 
must have been painted at a time when Sawant Singh had turned against the 
mundane and yet could be amused by the recollection of evil. His remarka- 
bly creative collaboration with his major artist, Nihal Chand, to whom we 
assign this picture on the basis of inscribed works, produced some of the most 
perfervidly dreamlike— at times nightmarish — pictures in all of Indian art. 



372 



251 



251. 

MAHARAJA DHIRAJ SINGH OF 
RAGHUGARH SLAYS A BEAR 
Raghugarh, early 18th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 7'/k X IQVi in. 
(18.2x26.7 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.363) 



Like other Hindu courts in the more remote areas of Central India, Rajasthan, 
and the Punjab Hills, Raghugarh was saved from many of the undermining 
influences of Mughal covirt culture by its geographical distance from Delhi. 
Relatively untouched by Mughal "refinement," Raghugarh painting remained 
closer to its folk roots, imbued with intense feeling and, at times, remark- 
able strength. Raghugarh was founded in the mid-seventeenth century by 
Lai Singh Kichi, a Chauhan Rajput, and flourished as an independent state 
until 1819, when it became a dependency of the neighboring state of Gwalior, 
ruled by the Sindhia family of the Marathas. Despite their meager resources, 
the Raghugarh rajas supported their local painters over a period of at least 
two hundred years. Their uninterrupted patronage is documented by paint- 
ings dating as early as 1660 and as late as the 1860s. Throughout this long 
history, Raghugarh painters, though they were influenced to some extent 
by their contemporaries at Kotah to the north and Malwa to the south, 
maintained their own distinctive idiom. No other Rajput school produced 
paintings of such uniform quality over so long a period. 

In this painting, Raja Dhiraj Singh (r. ca. 1685-1725) hunts with his 
dog in the rocky terrain of his state. His strong, massive figure dominates 
the scene; even the ferocious bear seems more awed by the raja than con- 
cerned by either the dog biting him or the arrows piercing his upper body. 
The blue-gray of the landscape, exactly the color of the soil of Raghugarh, 
makes this an ideal setting for a solitary hunt. The bold brushwork and the 
peculiar way the bushes are painted, with thinned blue-black pigment that is 
more like watercolor than the gouache used in the rest of the painting, are 
found in other works done for Dhiraj Singh and his successors until about 1780. 



J.M. 



374 



Crimes of passion were seldom depicted by Rajput artists, and never by 
early Mughal ones. This miniature describes a horrendous episode with the 
full detail of a police report. A husband, it appears, returned one night to 
find his wife and her lover in flagrante delicto. He drew his sword and killed 
the lover, and is shown here in the act of hacking at his terrified wife, who 
cowers on her charpoi, screams for help, and raises her arms to block the 
swift blade. As the sword descends, the artist stops the action, allowing us to 
explore the ill-starred house and courtyard, the principals of the drama, and 
the townscape. 

He has documented a typical Rajasthani town, with whitewashed mud 
walls, organically arranged, pleasingly crooked streets, and immaculate small 
houses. In the courtyard, auspicious drawings (rangolis) painted in rice flour 
by the doomed wife on the threshold bring to mind more peaceful days. At 
the right, still wrapped in his blanket, is the family servant, sleeping through 
the noisy incident. Others have been awakened: a crone, perhaps the evil 
schemer who arranged the assignation, listens at the front gate; at the right, 
a disturbed neighbor staggers to his doorway, clutching a club; at the left, a 
couple look on with concern, the woman depicted as a sympathetic friend of 
the wife, the husband as a partisan of the outraged mate; and a woman peers 
down from yet another window. 

Two comparably disturbing pictures are attributed to Gangaram, who 
may have worked at the court of Bikaner. 1 

1. For other works attributed to Gangaram, see: Khandalavala, Chandra, and Chandra, 
Miniature Painting, nos. 152, 153. 




252 



252. 

MURDER IN TOWN 

Perhaps by Gangaram 

Rajasthan, Bikaner, ca. 1740 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 7 3 /4 X 1 \% in. 

(19.7X29.5 cm.) 

The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



375 



253 



253. 

RANA JAGAT SINGH II OF ME WAR 
HUNTING WATER BUFFALO 
Inscribed, on reverse: "Nur ad-Din" 
Rajasthan, Mewar, ca. 1745 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 18«/4 x lli/ 2 in. (46.4 X 29.2 cm.) 
Miniature: 17% X IOVh in. (44.8 X 26.4 cm. 
National Museum , New Delhi (57.4) 



During the mid-eighteenth century, most maharajas, rajas, rais, nawabs, 
and thakurs, even the prestigious rana of Mewar — the titled world of 
Hindustan — followed the irresponsible example of Muhammad Shah and culti- 
vated pleasure above statecraft. Confronted by the threatening Marathas, 
the Rajputs failed once again to unite. Rana Jagat Singh II, absorbed in 
merriment, preferred paying tribute to fighting. A fun-loving, inventive 
spendthrift, he sponsored festivals and elephant fights and encouraged idleness 
and dissipation. He was also a great builder, and visitors to Udaipur are still 
enthralled by his pavilions and palaces. 

Much of his time was devoted to the celebration of festivals and seasonal 
hunts. Each occasion, such as the one represented here, in which the rana 
ritually slays water buffalo when the monsoon floods tributaries of Lake 
Pichola, was a production. For the more gala events, special costumes 
were designed in conformance with the seasons, times of day, and religious 



376 



events; appropriate music was performed; and the royal kitchens concocted 
suitable delicacies for the assembled royalty, nobility, and guests. These ex- 
travaganzas went on for days, and were enjoyed by the entire community. 

It is no wonder that Rana Jagat Singh, as producer, director, and leading 
performer in these frequent celebrations, commissioned his artists to paint 
them, and ordered them to record every detail. Invariably, these vividly 
colored, crowded, and theatrical compositions express the carefree joy of 
the rana, who often appears several times, carrying out his myriad responsi- 
bilities as master of ceremonies, sacrificer of animals, and host. 

Published: Brijbhushan, The World of Indian Miniatures, pi. 23. 



Rana Jagat Singh II's pleasures included building. Under his artistic direction, 
Lake Pichola and the palaces on its shores were transformed into a rococo 
stage for his fetes, amours, hunts, and contemplation. Artists contributed to 
the projects, proposing and designing architectural details, executing murals, 
and later painting large views of the rana's marvels. This bird's-eye render- 
ing of the lake pavilion (which has now been redesigned as a hotel), projects 
the delightful building, with its courtyards and gardens, through sweetly 
innocent eyes. 

Published: Painting in British India 1757-1857, no. 27, fig. 6; Welch and Beach, Gods, 
Thrones, and Peacocks, pp. 48, 79, 121, no. 34, pi. 34. 




254 



254. 

THE RANA'S LAKE PAVILION 
Rajasthan, Mewar, Udaipur, mid-18th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper, lSVa x 18 in. 
(39.4x45.7 cm.) 
Collection Stuart Cary Welch 



255 



256 



255. 

SILVER BOTTLE 
Rajasthan, ca. 1700 
Height IL/2 in. (29.2 cm. 
Private collection 



Weighty, unadorned, simple in its lines, and subtly proportioned, this bot- 
tle could have held wine, water, or asha, a liqueur flavored with saffron 
and other spices. (Each court took pride in its own formula for this heady 
and relaxing drink.) Although the form derives from the long-necked zinc 
bottles of Rajasthan (intended for cooling by immersion in water mixed 
with saltpeter, which caused rapid evaporation), the shape of the zinc bottles 
may in turn have derived from less courtly bottles made from water buffalo 
hide. The bottle also reveals the influence of richly jeweled Mughal exam- 
ples, and they, of course, closing the art-historical circle, were based upon 
Rajput prototypes. Bottles of this design, with their agreeable associations, 
were often placed in niches; and they are found, too, as pietra dura inlays in 
Mughal buildings. 



256. 

GILDED SILVER HUQQA BASE 
Mewar, Udaipur, mid-18th century 
Height 7V4 in. (18.5 cm.), diameter 6V2 in. 
(16.5 cm.) 

Collection Colonel R. K. Tandan, Secunderabad 
(RKT/S-169) 



Around this silver huqqa base, eight cast and chased musicians and dancers, 
all women, perform, each framed within a graceful arched colonnade. Styl- 
ized flowers, acanthus leaves, and garlands further enrich this sumptuous 
object, which must have been made for a rana of Mewar, probably at his 
capital. According to their portraits, Rajput noblemen were rarely without 
a huqqa: while they ride, a servant usually trots along beside the horse, 



378 



bearing the huqqa base, from which a tube extends to provide gratification; 
and even in the zenana, while the nobleman caresses a wife or infant, the 
huqqa gurgles away nearby. 

Most of these attractive objects, often made of silver or gold, have gone 
into the melting pot, in keeping with the Indian penchant for recycling old 
artifacts into new. Paintings, however, reveal the astonishing variety of huqqa 
bases, mouthpieces, and "snakes" or tubes, which — like dagger handles and 
the appurtenances for betel nut chewing — were designed and worked with 
unflagging imagination. At Rajput courts, bases were cast and sculpted in 
the form of birds, elephants, dancing girls, and amorous couples; and zoo- 
morphic mouthpieces were lavished with the same degree of imagination 
and skill we associate with eighteenth-century French snuffboxes or Faberge's 
Easter eggs. (See also nos. 123, 171, 218.) 



On a torrid day before the monsoon, Maharaja Madho Singh (r. 1760-78) 
whiles away time playing chess in the mardana (men's quarters) of his palace. 
Clad only in paijama, he lolls on a royal charpoi while a servant shampoos 
(massages) his foot and a punkahwala freshens the air — and discourages 
insects — by tugging the cord of the punkah, a cloth-covered wood frame 
suspended above. 

The artist composed this unusually intimate view of royalty at rest in 
the white-in-whites of marble, chuna (polished lime), and muslin, relieved 
by brightly colored, richly patterned stuffs, gold, and jewels. Seeing him 
thus at ease, one might not realize that Maharaja Madho Singh was an active, 
effective ruler, admired as a patron of science and learning. Had not dysen- 
tery cut short his reign after seventeen years, Madho Singh might have resolved 
the chief problem of the Jat rulers of Bharatpur and prevented the splitting- 
off from Jaipur of Alwar. 



257. 

MADHO SINGH OF JAIPUR PLAYING 
CHESS 

Rajasthan, Jaipur, 3rd quarter of 18th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper, \3Vi X 9'/> in. 
(34.3 x 24.1 cm.) 

The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



Published: The Indian Heritage, p. 60, no. 147. 




257 



379 



258. 

MAHARAO UMED SINGH HUNTING 

IN THE JUNGLE 

By Shaikh Taju 

Rajasthan, Kotah, dated 1781 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 2\Vi x 32Vi in. (54.6 x 82.6 cm.) 

Miniature: 20 l A X 31 '/a in. (51.4 x 80 cm.) 

Collection Wendy F. Findlay, New York 



At Kotah, Maharao Umed Singh (r. 1770-1819), a capable ruler who was 
also the best horseman and marksman in the country, was fortunate in being 
served by his uncle Rajrana Zalim Singh, one of Rajasthan's most dynamic 
statesmen. Zalim Singh so adroitly maneuvered matters, internal and external, 
that the state prospered in spite of the threatening Marathas. Affluent, 
protected, and spared the responsibilities of governing, the maharao was 
free to enjoy Rajput domesticity, to concentrate on religious rituals, and to 
perpetuate his family's enthusiastic pursuit of lions, tigers, and other game. 

As before, the Kotah ateliers specialized in painting hunting scenes, 
which are among the liveliest and most compelling known. Under Umed 
Singh and the galvanic Zalim Singh, many of these shikar pictures were 




380 



painted in a highly appealing fresh idiom, apparently by an emerging wing 
of the ateliers staffed by masters such as Shaikh Taju, Hans Raj Joshi, and 
Bhimsen. Their ravishingly coloristic pictures were painted more broadly, 
in thicker, flatter pigments, and were far less draftsmanlikc and more 
ornamental than those of the Kotah Master and his followers (see nos. 241, 
242, 245). Shaikh Taju's manner brings to mind the rhythmic, consciously 
naive jungle scenes by the Douanier Rousseau. Less addicted to drawing 
from life, the shaikh and his fellow artists painted plumper, sleeker deer and 
less ferocious lions, tigers, sloth bears, and wild boar, from their minds 
rather than from observation. 



259 



259. 

BOUNDING HORSES 
Attributed to Chokha 
Rajasthan, Devgarh, ca. 1800 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: W 7 A x 16 in. (27.5 x 40.7 cm.) 
Miniature: 8V2 X 14 3 /« in. (21.7 X 36.5 cm.) 
The Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, 
Achenbach Foundation for Graphic Arts, 
{Catherine Ball Collection (X71.42.426) 



These neighing, snorting, pounding horses, with lashing tails, high rumps, 
and unaccountably bedroom eyes, were painted at Devgarh, sixth among 
sixteen feudatories of Mewar. The land grant to this small state was be- 
stowed in 1692, presumably along with the distinctive title of "rawat" con- 
ferred upon its chiefs. During the last quarter of the eighteenth century, if 
not before, Devgarh maintained small but busy ateliers in which a few art- 
ists painted strikingly original pictures. Perhaps because of the generous size 
of the patrons — one of whom was nearly seven feet tall and died at twenty- 
two after vainly struggling to reduce his bulk — Devgarh pictures are 
imposing, inhabited by buxom figures and animals. 

Chokha, to whom Bounding Horses can be attributed, was the talented 
son of a gifted father, Bagta, who was also an artist. Brightly hued and 
crisp-edged, with sharply incisive characterizations verging on caricature, 
the older master's pictures were naturalistic and classical compared with 
his son's. For Chokha's style might be deemed the most peculiarly personal 
and empathic in all of Rajput art. To a critic from the imperial Mughal 
establishment, Chokha would have seemed a clumsy draftsman, a crudely 
awkward colorist, and a slovenly craftsman. To us, his flaws are essential to 
his engaging manner, which transcends academic shortcomings. Bounding 
Horses, one of his earlier pictures, painted under his father's disciplining 
influence, expresses Chokha's energy; and it also invites us into his 
imponderable, idiosyncratic world, where men behave like animals and hu- 
manized animals seem to be fully their equals, if not their betters. 



260. 

PECHHAVAI WITH GOPIS, COWS, AND 

HEAVENLY BEINGS 

Rajasthan, Jodhpur or possibly Bikaner, 

late 18th century 

Paint on cotton, 8 ft. X 8 ft. 4 in. 

(2.44 x 2.54 m.) 

Collection H. Peter Stern, 

Mountainville, New York 



Pechhavais, hangings placed behind sacred images, were important in 
Vaishnavite worship. This one, with its reverential gopis, the herdswomen 
with whom Lord Krishna disported in the groves of Vrindavan, would have 
been placed behind an image of the god in celebration of a particular time 
within his annual cycle. One of a set of hangings intended to be rotated 
according to the cycle of Lord Krishna's festivals and rituals, its fineness of 
design and execution suggests that it was painted for a shrine in a palace, or 
that it was a royal offering to another Vaishnavite place of worship. 

In style it conforms to the mode of Jodhpur or possibly Bikaner, both 
of the Rathor clan. Although the art of Jodhpur is less well known than the 
traditions of its cadet branches at Bikaner and Kishangarh, it seems to be 
divisible into two modes: one secular and strongly influenced by Mughal 
and Deccani court painting, the other religious and of indigenous Rajput 
character. Despite its devotional subject, this pechhavai, perhaps the most 
exquisite we have seen, can be assigned to the secular branch of the Jodhpur 



382 



260 O 



or Bikaner ateliers. 1 The gopis resemble ladies from the royal establishment, 
and all their attributes, from jewels to fans, are of courtly splendor. Inasmuch 
as Jodhpur princes served as Mughal commanders in the Deccan, it is not 
surprising that the mango trees, with their ornamental and appetizing ripe 
fruit, recall those painted in Golconda and Hyderabad. In all likelihood, 
seventeenth-century Rathor princes, like those of Bundi, Kotah, and Amber, 
commissioned Deccani artists to paint pechhavais. On returning to Rajasthan, 
they brought not only the pictures with them but also, in many instances, 
the artists. And a century or so later, descendants of these artists turned for 
models to the pechhavais from the Deccan as well as to those from Nathadwara 
(see no. 223). 2 

1. Stella Kramrisch made the suggestion that this hanging might be from Bikaner. 

2. For a comparable Deccani example, see: Skelton, Rajasthani Temple Hangings, 
no. 2. 



261. 

LORD KRISHNA'S COSMIC DANCE 

(RASAMANDALA) 

Jaipur, late 18th century 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 26 V2 x 20 in. 

(67.3 X 50.8 cm.) 

Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 
(AG-1382) 



Krishna, the divine lover, was worshiped by most of the rulers of Jaipur, 
who dedicated their principal shrines to him. His cosmic moonlight dance at 
Vrindavan with his beloved Radha amid concentric circles of gopis — each 
of whom believed that he danced with her alone — is depicted in this large 
miniature of the Rasamandala, a Vaishnavite cosmogram. Targetlike, the 
composition flickers at the edges, gaining power, speed, and intensity of 
color toward the center, where a radiant Krishna and Radha, his favorite 





384 



261, detail > 



among the gopis, dance with rhapsodic grace. From above, gandharvas in 
their flying chariots rain down flowers. The artist honored his patron, 
Maharaja Pratap Singh (r. 1779-1803), by painting the Blue God in his likeness. 

Maharaja Pratap, who staged celebrations recnacting the divine dance 
in the courtyards of the City Palace, inherited the throne of Jaipur after his 
half brother's death in a riding accident. According to court rumor, the fall 
had been precipitated by a dose of poison administered on behalf of Maharaja 
Pratap's mother, who became regent. The maharaja was dominated by her 
until 1787, when he allied with the maharaja of Jodhpur and others against 
the Marathas, who were defeated at Tonga the same year. Within a few 
years, Maharaja Pratap, now considered gallant and capable, had spent more 
on victory celebrations than the cost of the war; and before long, the Marathas 
and others, lured by Jaipur's reputed riches, renewed their attacks. 

Published: Mchta, Studies in Indian Painting, pp. 31-34, pi. 11; Das, Treasures of Indian 
Painting, scr. 3. 



262. 

TANPURA OF MAHARAJA PRATAP 
SINGH OF JAIPUR 
Rajasthan, Jaipur, late 18th century 
Wood inlaid with ivory, length 37 3 /s in. 
(94.9 cm.) 

Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, Jaipur 
(T&C/Z) 



Historians too often concentrate on battles, treaties, triumphs, and disasters, 
oblivious to the illuminating private moments of individuals, even of royal 
ones. This perfectly proportioned, meticulously inlaid tanpura — a rare sur- 
vival of work by a great instrument maker — calls up the spirit of Maharaja 
Pratap Singh far more vividly than words about his victory at Tonga. Seeing 
it, we imagine the prince plucking its strings to supply the drone for singers 
or instrumentalists at recitals in Jaipur's City Palace. 




263 



Rajput painters, like those of European courts, were called upon to design 
or adorn princely accessories. Many craftsmen participated in the making of 
this shield. A leather worker removed the hair from the hide and tanned the 
skin for the man in the armory charged with preparing shields. The armorer 
cut it to shape, molded it over a wooden frame, stained and dried it, and 
with his helpers fitted it for straps before passing it on to the artist to ornament 
with flowers, appealingly curly lions — two of them in combat — and a bor- 
der of spritely birds. In the meantime, the local jeweler, who probably plied 
his trade in the bazaar as well as in the fort ateliers, cast and finished the 
bosses, which were attached after the artist had completed his job. Such a 
fine shield must have been received with pride by its patron, who probably 
rewarded the craftsmen and often brought it out from the silahkana (armory), 
where it would have hung with countless others in tidy rows. 



263. 

SHIELD 

Rajasthan, perhaps Kotah or Devgarh, 
ca. 1800 

Water buffalo hide, painted, with silver bosses, 
diameter 23'/2 in. (59.7 cm.) 
The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



387 



THE PUNJAB 
PLAINS AND HILLS 



264. 

MASK OF SHIVA 

Punjab Hills, perhaps Kulu, 

early 17th century 

Bronze, 5 7 /h in. (14.8 cm.) 

Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 

Art, Hyderabad (76.972) 



In the villages of the Himalayan areas of Kulu and Chamba such repousee 
plaques, locally called mohras, are common. Most mohras represent Shiva, 
but masks of the goddess Devi and other deities were also made. The plaques 
arc cast in bronze, brass, or sometimes silver. The head is sculpted in bold 
relief; the neck and shoulders are more summarily treated. Many scholars 
mistakenly believe these plaques were worn as masks like those used by 
dancers and actors. Stella Kramrisch beautifully describes their purpose: 
"Groups of such plaques or images, their metal faces gleaming, were — and 
still are — taken out of the temples on a palanquin in processions during 
religious festivals." 1 "Each mask is a thanks-offering. It is consecrated by a 
priest (pujari) and the shaman talks through the mask answering the ques- 
tions which have been put to the deity. . . . Each village has its own masks. 
From their high position on the mountain on the chariot, they inspect the 
harvest. . . . These masks of deity, unlike those worn by men, are kept from 
year to year in the village as property of the deity. A tithe is collected for the 
preparation of new masks. The money is paid to the craftsmen through the 
clerk of the village." 2 

Mohras have been made for at least fourteen hundred years, in a bewil- 
dering array of sizes and styles. The known examples range from as small as 
two inches high to as large as a foot. In general, we can say that those made 
between the sixth and the fourteenth century are in the tradition of the 
classical bronzes of the region, and most of those dating from the fifteenth 
century onward arc in folk style. On plaques of Shiva, whatever their style, 
the deity wears a lobed crown, beaded earrings, and two neck ornaments, 
one a beaded or cordlike necklace, the other a pair of wriggling serpents, 
symbols of Shiva and fertility. The flattened body below the face has two 
beadlike nipples, a mere suggestion of a chest. The hypnotizing stare of 
Shiva's three large, commanding eyes, wide open in a faraway gaze, and his 
divinely mysterious smile charge these plaques with special energy. 

This extraordinary piece was manufactured by a technique often used 
for folk bronzes by craftsmen in Bastar, Bihar, Orissa, and Bengal but only 
rarely by the metal casters in the Hills. The envisioned metal image was first 
modeled in clay. When the clay was dry, the mold was wrapped with pieces 
of wax wire placed one against the other and pressed together until the form 
was completely sheathed. On this plaque the wax strips were purposely not 
smoothed, and the resulting ribbed effect has been used with great feeling to 
infuse the god's image with an added vitality. The beaklike nose and the 
large, downward-looking eyes arc reminiscent of the earliest Pahari paint- 
ings from Basohli of carvings in wood and stone from the Himalayan states. 



1. Kramrisch, Manifestations of Shiva, p. 103, no. 83. 

2. Kramrisch, Unknown India, p. 62. 



J.M. 



388 




264 




265. 

DEVI IS ADORED BY THE GODS 
Punjab Hills, Basohli, ca. 1660-70 
Opaque watercolor and beetle-wing cases 
on paper 

Folio: 8 X 12 in. (20.3 X 30.5 cm.) 
Miniature: 7% x 10% in. (18.1 x 27.6 cm.) 
Collection Kasturbhai Lalbhai, Ahmedabad 



This is one of the most captivating and profound of Indian pictures. Devi is 
shown here in the aspect of Chandi, "the Cruel One," created from the 
anger of the gods, who were then compelled to worship her. The setting, 
with its courtly pavilion and paradisiacal trees that seem to be ecstatic emana- 
tions from the musicians' fanfare, contributes to the religious mood. Seated 
on her throne, protected by tigers, four-armed Devi receives the homage of 
the assembled gods. Vishnu, also with four arms, stands to her left, while 
Shiva, with a third eye and boar's tusks, wearing a leopard skin, fans her 
with a chauri (yak-tail fly whisk). The four-armed and four-headed Brahma 
blows on a conch shell and plays a stringed instrument, and behind him 
Durga holds a sword and a pair of cymbals in her four arms. Devi Is Adored 
perfectly embodies the moment of classical ripeness in Hill painting's most 
traditional and compelling school. Basohli, a small state only twenty miles 
long and fifteen miles wide, gave birth to the earliest known Hill miniatures 
imbued with unmistakable and concentrated regional characteristics. A cadet 
branch of the house of Kulu, Basohli was founded in 1598 by Raja Bhupat 
Pal, who was said to be so strong that he could rub out the letters on a coin 
between his fingers. Bhupat Pal descended from the Rajput Balauria clan, a 
family associated with the holy city of Hardwar, near the source of the 
sacred river Ganges. A victim of intrigues, he was imprisoned by Jahangir 
in 1613. He was released in 1627 by order of Shah Jahan, who presented him 
with a robe of honor. After his murder in Delhi in 1635 at the age of sixty- 
two, Bhupat Pal was succeeded by his seven-year-old son, Sangram Pal. 
When he was twelve Raja Sangram Pal was summoned to Delhi, where he 
was praised for his good looks by the royal ladies. He remained in the Mughal 
capital for one year and then apparently returned to Basohli. He married a 
number of wives, seven of whom committed themselves to the flames in 
rites of sati following his death in 1673. 



390 



Iridescent with beetle-wing cases, exquisitely painted in colors rarely 
combined, boldly drawn, and charged with devotional power, this Devi was 
probably done for Raja Sangram Pal. Only the heightened courtliness and 
the extreme fineness of execution of Sangram Pal's pictures reflect his so- 
journ in Delhi. The goddess's robust features and intense gaze hark back to a 
more primal phase of Hill art, represented by the mask of Shiva (no. 264), 
and excite us with the prospect of discovering painted icons from the emergent 
phases of the Basohli style, when it may have been less refined but was 
surely more smolderingly passionate. 

Published: The Art o f India and Pakistan, p. 126, no. 511; W. Archer, Indian Painting in 
the Punjab Hills: Essays, pp. 6, 15, fig. 5; W. Archer, Indian Paintings from the Punjab 
Hills: A Survey, vol. 1, p. 35, no. 3, vol. 2, p. 17, no. 3. 



Comparable to a superb folk melody artfully enriched with grace notes, 
the Lady with Musicians and Pet Rabbits evokes a refined court in the Hills, 
where aesthetic ferment was zealously encouraged at a very leisurely pace. 
This painting comes from a series depicting a poetic catalogue of nayakas 
and nayikas in various emotional states and amorous situations. Hours of 
massage, oiling, perfuming, combing, and costuming, all to entice her lover, 
preceded this heroine's lonely stroll through a garden as immaculately tended 
as she. Nevertheless, she appears slightly withdrawn and sad, and her attendant 
musicians are anxious. Forlorn she might be, but the connoisseur who commis- 
sioned this masterpiece encouraged his artist to draw forth, slowly and 
carefully, every nuance from eachjewel, floral pattern, stripe, and sinuous line. 

Inasmuch as Sangram Pal died without male issue, he was succeeded in 
1673 by his half brother, Hindal Pal, who was ill-treated by his stepmother 
and forcibly detained in the palace until he came to the throne at the age of 
forty. Basohli painting as seen here probably stems from Hindal Pal's five- 
year reign, and may have provided a creative outlet for his housebound 
energies. 

Published: W. Archer, Indian Paintings from the Punjab Hills: A Survey, vol. 1, p. 40, 
no. 5 (iii), vol. 2, p. 24, no. 5 (iii); Randhawa and Galbraith, Indian Painting, pi. 28. 



266. 

LADY WITH MUSICIANS AND 
PET RABBITS 

From a Nayaka-Nayika (Lovers) series 
Punjab Hills, Basohli, ca. 1670-75 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 7 7 /« x \2Vh in. (20 x 31.5 cm.) 
Miniature: 6'/« X 10y 2 in. (15.6 X 26.7 cm.) 
Collection Gopi Krishna Kanoria, Patna 
(GK.178) 




391 



Pure landscape is rare in Indian painting. Except for a few Jain examples, 
Indian pictures ordinarily contain a "subject," albeit no more than a single 
deity, figure, animal, or blossom. This flowerscape may have been the open- 
ing illustration of a literary series, meant to establish mood and setting. The 
idea for it may have struck a raja as he admired a Mughal textile, binding, 
floral border, or marble relief during a visit to Delhi or Agra. The wispy 
dragon clouds above the looming, rhythmically alive flowers and feathery 
trees recall the clouds, ultimately traceable to Chinese art, that occurred 
frequently as ornament in Mughal art after the early years of Shah Jahan's 
reign. Here, however, imperial motifs have been completely adjusted to the 
Hill style of the Balaurias as practiced at Kulu or Basohli. 




267 



267. 

TREES AND FLOWERS IN A LANDSCAPE 
Punjab Hills, Kulu or Basohli, ca. 1680 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 5->4 X 1 Vk in. 
(14.6X30.3 cm.) 

Collection Kasturbhai Lalbhai, Ahmedabad 



In later episodes of the Ramayana, Rama makes his way back to Ayodhya, 
after fourteen years in exile, to regain his kingdom. The long, drawn-out 
war in Lanka has ended at last; Sita has been rescued, the demon king Ravana 
who abducted her slain. The scene portrayed here is the auspicious moment 
of Rama's coronation within the seclusion of the palace walls. Surrounded 
by his followers and attendants, Rama sits enthroned in the palace at the left, 
while the women witness the ceremony from an adjoining building and the 
populace and the royal retainers, some with elephants and horses, wait pa- 
tiently in the courtyard in the foreground. Rather than agitated gaiety and 
excitement, the mood is one of dignified calm as the people of Ayodhya 
give thanks in silent prayer for the happy end to the long ordeal and for 
the safe return of Rama, Sita, and Lakshmana. Like generations of Indian 
painters before and since, the sensitive artist has captured the emotions of 
the crowd not by gesture or facial expression but with color. 

The same muted, refined palette appears in several other paintings, now 
in collections throughout the world, whose many compositional and stylis- 
tic affinities leave little doubt they were all painted by the same artist or 
group of artists, perhaps of the same family, who had either been trained in 
the Mughal style or descended from painters who had. In all of these paint- 
ings the figures, usually clustered in groups, are small in stature, with softly 
modeled faces. Men and women of rank wear Shah Jahani costumes, others 
raiments of local mode. The trees are often cypresses, sometimes tall with 
small, fine leaves, or, as here, large and full with feathery foliage in light to 
dark shades of green. Pairs of birds in flight break the monotony of the sky, 
a band the color of lapis lazuli that merges into a near-white stripe of clouds 
gently softening and fusing with a band of paler blue along the very high 
horizon. 

In addition to four other folios from the Ramayana series, the group 
includes twelve folios from a Bhagavata Purana, a series of smaller pictures 
depicting gods and goddesses, ragamala paintings, a fragment showing two 
young girls, two pictures of horses, each with its groom, and several unpub- 
lished paintings in the Mittal Museum in Hyderabad. The folios from the 
Ramayana and the Bhagavata Purana seem to be by one artist. They are also 
earlier than the rest, probably dating from about 1670 to 1675. Both sets 
were drawn with a firm, sure hand, reflected in the confident outlines. The 
brushwork is similar, and vivid colors are often used in the same combina- 
tions. The paper is thin and smooth, the color surface rich and luxurious. 
Birds fly in the sky, the foliage is feathery light, and the figures have slightly 
enlarged heads, small eyes, and faces modeled with shading near the temples 
and along the hairline. The pictures also have certain recurring decorative 
and architectural details in common: the patterns on door hangings, the 
placement and striped designs of dhurries, the shapes and forms of cornices 
and turrets. 

During the reign of Emperor Aurangzeb (1658-1707), when the court 
arts languished for want of patronage, Mughal-trained painters took service 
wherever there was comparative peace and a willing patron, and many found 
work illustrating Hindu subjects for Rajput rulers in Rajasthan and the Punjab. 
That it was also not uncommon for talented painters to migrate from one 
state in the Hills to another at the invitation of a raja often makes assigning 
exact provenances even more difficult. 

Precisely where and when this group of pictures was painted has long 
been the subject of scholarly debate. So close arc they in style to paintings 
done at Bikaner, in Rajasthan, that for many years it was assumed they were 
painted there. Recent studies, however, theorize that they were probably 
produced in the Hills at one of the Rajput courts that was strongly influenced 
by Mughal art and may have hired an artist or artists who had worked for a 
time for the Rathor princes of Bikaner. 1 Catherine Glynn assigns the paint- 
ings to the Hill school of Mandi and dates them between 1630 and 1645. 2 It is 
possible that some of them were indeed painted at Mandi. But there are 
more convincing reasons to suggest that most if not all of the miniatures in 
this group are early products, painted between about 1670 and 1700, of the 
workshop at Bilaspur (Kahlur), another of the important Pahari schools. 



268. 

THE CORONATION OF RAMA 
From a manuscript of the Ramayana 
Punjab Hills, Mandi or Bilaspur, ca. 1670 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Miniature: 15 x 10 3 /4 in. (38.1 X 30 cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of In 
Art, Hyderabad (76.232) 




268 




2hH, detail 



Painting at Bilaspur seems to have begun during the reign of Raja Dip 
Chand, who came to the throne in 1650 and ruled until 1667. Dip Chand 
not only campaigned for Aurangzcb but almost certainly spent some time 
at the court in Delhi, an association that would very likely have created at 
Bilaspur a hospitable climate attractive to Mughal artists. And many fea- 
tures peculiar to this Ramayana series and the group of related paintings — the 
treatment of the sky, the drawing of the figures and their costumes, the tree 
types, ornaments, architectural details, and color schemes — are also found 
in paintings from Bilaspur. 3 

j.M. 

1. Sec Khandalavala and Chandra, Miniatures and Sculptures, p. 24, fig. 73; Welch, A 
Flower from Every Meadow, p. 65, no. 33; Khandalavala, "Two Bikaner Paintings," 
pp. 301-4, pi. v, figs. 635-44; The Indian Heritage, p. 64, no. 160. 

2. Glynn, "Early Painting in Mandi," including thirty-four figures. 

3. Several of the Bilaspur paintings are published in W. Archer, Indian Paintings from 
the Punjab Hills: A Survey, vol. 2, pp. 170-77, nos. 5, 8, 9, 11, 13, 17-19; Lerner, 
The Flame and the Lotus, no. 62. 

Published: Glynn, "Early Painting in Mandi," fig. 16. 



395 




269 



269. 

AHIRI RAGINI 

From a Ragamala (Garland of Melody) series 
Punjab Hills, Basohli, early 18th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 8 X 7'/2 in. (20.3 X 19.1 cm.) 
Miniature: 6 7 A X 6'/t in. (17.5 X 15.9 cm.) 
Collection Gopi Krishna Kanoria, Patna 
(BD.18) 



According to Mesakarma, a court priest of Rewa during the sixteenth 
century who composed verses on ragas (see no. 191), Ahiri ragini, the 
musical mode interpreted visually in this painting, sounds like a snake. 
Simply composed, with large, flat areas of hot color and a curtain flaring 
out to reveal a symbolically closed door, the picture is charged with mystery. 
Why does the sad, concerned young girl feed a snake? Does he represent 
Shiva? Is he a surrogate for her absent lover? Or both? 



396 



A respectful hush surrounds Raja Sidh Sen (r. 1684-1727), the impressive, 
enormous raja of Mandi who is shown here with the commanders of his 
army. Fifty years old when he came to the throne in 1684, Sidh Sen lived to 
be one hundred. Credited with supernatural powers, he was said to possess 
a potent book of spells. He was also a great warrior and deeply religious. 
During his long reign, he founded two temples and welcomed the tenth 
Sikh guru, Govind Singh, when he visited Mandi in about 1697 (according 
to legend he arrived by air in an iron cage) to gain support against the Mughals. 
The guru granted Sidh Sen a boon: "When Mandi is plundered, heavenly 
balls will be fired," a prediction of invulnerability that held true until 1840, 
when Mandi was conquered by the Sikhs. 

Mandi was founded in the tenth to eleventh century, an offshoot of 
Suket, which dates to the eighth century. The ruling family is descended 
from the Sena rajas of Bengal. Mandi painting is usually rugged and earthy, 
with darkly outlined silhouetted figures. The power, dignity, and rock-cut 
solidity of these pictures express a world in slow motion. The palette of 
dark greens, tans, indigo, and brownish reds well suits the Mandi artists' 
dignified portraits and their depictions of thick-limbed deities. 

Published: W. Archer, Indian Paintings from the Punjab Hills: A Survey, vol. 1, p. 353, 
no. 6, vol. 2, p. 263, no. 6. 




270 



270. 

RAJA SIDH SEN OF MANDI IN 
AUDIENCE 

Punjab Hills, Mandi, ca. 1700-20 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 17'/ 2 X 13% in. (44.5 x 35.2 cm.) 

Miniature: 13'/h X 9Vs in. (33.3 x 23.2 cm.) 

National Museum, New Delhi 

(62.1774) 



271. 

PATKA WITH DESIGN OF FLOWERING 
TREES 

Dacca, 18th century 

Cotton, with metallic thread and beetle-wing 
cases, 12 ft. 3 A in. X 23% in. (3.62 m. x 60 cm.) 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Gift of 
DenmanW. Ross (24.433) 



Nature into art: beetle-wing cases, here stitched on fine muslin woven 
with gold and silver metallic threads to create a paradoxically icy forest 
fire of iridescent ornament, were particularly admired in the Hills, where 
artists of the Basohli school applied them to favored pictures. Magically 
glittering, they are also brittle and fragile. Indeed, this patka is a tangible 
affront to practicality; its wearer must have had to be exceedingly careful 
lest his celestial radiance snag on a fingernail and flutter to earth. 

Like so many precious goods that sparkled at Indian courts, this rare 
textile may not have been made where it was used. Inasmuch as Dacca, in 
eastern Bengal, was renowned for its cobweb fine cottons, this fabric may 
have been made there, but the finished piece would surely have been welcomed 
by any discerning court, whether in the Plains or the Hills. 



Demons, swimming elephants, sea monsters, bears, and several kinds of 
monkeys, assembled in a bright landscape planted with cypresses and plantains, 
make this large picture irresistible. But the painting is also a dramatic illus- 
tration to Part VI of the Ramayana, which recounts the adventures of 
Rama and his brother Lakshmana, who set out to rescue Rama's wife Sita 
after she was abducted by the demonic Ravana, tyrant of Lanka (Sri Lanka). 
Supported by an army of bears and monkeys, Rama and Lakshmana success- 
fully laid siege to the golden fort of Lanka, slew the archvillain, and released 
Sita. Here Rama and Lakshmana, surrounded by their appealing army, dis- 
cuss the proposed attack with Ravana's turncoat brother Vibhisana, whose 
knowledge of the golden fort interests them intensely. As they talk, two 
demons disguised as monkeys, spies intent on infiltrating the enemy's ranks, 
sidle over from the fort. The account of the episode from Valmiki's Ramayana 
is written on the back of the painting, which still bears marks left by the 
fingers of the storytellers who held it up to their courtly audiences. 

This miniature was painted at Guler, where a fifteenth-century fortress 
dominates the view above the broad Ban Ganga River and large numbers of 
monkeys disport, making it an apt setting for the subject. Guler maintained 
a major school of Hill painting that can be documented from the late seven- 
teenth through the nineteenth century. Guler artists were invariably accom- 
plished and innovative draftsmen as well as colorists, and their pictures ranged 
from the stately to the humorous to the poignant and poetic. 

Fifteen finished miniatures, a few barely touched with color, and fifty 
or more preparatory drawings for the exciting series from which this pic- 
ture comes have survived. 1 All seem to be the work of a master artist with a 
genius for simple, bold composition and effectively dramatic presentation. 
Here, he laid out a lively and precise pattern accented by trees, arches, 
windows, and figures. With astonishing cleverness, he crowned the rightmost 
cypress tree with a delicate fillip, thereby joining the right and left halves of 
a design that would otherwise have broken in two. The artist's humorous 
psychological insight into the natures of men and animals is also in evidence 
here: each bear, monkey, and pair thereof should be inspected with care with 
an eye for zoomorphic waggery. 



272. 

TWO SPIES DISGUISED AS MONKEYS 
APPROACH THE ARMY OF RAMA 
From a manuscript of the Ramayana 
Punjab Hills, Guler, ca. 1725 
Opaque watcrcolor on paper, 23Va X 32 3 /4 in. 
(60.3 x83.2 cm.) 

The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



Overleaf, 272 D> 



272, detail 




The series of illustrations to the Siege of Lanka was commissioned 
by Raja Dalip Singh (r. 1695-1741), chief of the Katoch family, which can 
be traced to the early fifteenth century, when it split off from Kangra. Dalip 
Singh came to the throne at the age of seven or eight. He was an effective, 
peaceful, and devout ruler, but he was apparently more interested in religion, 
the arts, and the quiet enjoyment of life than in governing. He turned over 
the administration of his state to his eldest son, Bishan Singh, in about 1725 
and then to his second son, Govardhan Chand, when Bishan Singh died. 
Portraits of Dalip Singh show him at worship, playing polo, and — most 
often — conversing with his family and friends. 

1. Ten other pictures from the scries are in the collection of the Museum of Fine 
Arts, Boston; four are in The Metropolitan Museum of Art; and the Cleveland Art 
Museum and the British Museum each have one. An unfinished picture is in a private 
collection, and many of the drawings are in the Prince of Wales Museum of Western 
India, Bombay, and in the collection of B. K. Birla, Calcutta. 

Published: Welch, A Flower from Every Meadow, pp. 74-75, no. 41; W. Archer and 
Czuma, Indian Art, no. 115. 



273. 

RAJA BALWANT SINGH OF JAMMU 
WRITING A LETTER IN HIS TENT 
By Nainsukh 

Punjab Hills, Jammu, ca. 1760 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 8V2 x \VA in. (21.5 x 28.5 cm.) 

Miniature: 7K* x \(Wh in. (19.8 x 27.7 cm.) 

Trustees of the Prince of Wales Museum of 

Western India, Bombay (33.108) 



In India as elsewhere, works of art are enlivened and enriched by congenial, 
creative collaborations between artists and patrons. Without Jahangir, his 
"Wonders" — Abu 3 1-Hasan, Mansur, and Farrukh Beg — would have painted 
less insightfully, and in the Hills, Nainsukh's inspiration might have flagged 
without Balwant Singh of Jammu (1724-1763). Were it possible to over- 
come time and space to bring together these artists and patrons, exhilarating 
exchanges would be likely, for the Mughal emperor and the royal Jammu 
connoisseur surely had much in common, as did their artists. Jahangir and 
Balwant Singh appreciated life's trivia, and their congenial, ardent painters 
were of like minds. Jahangir would have applauded Nainsukh's intimate 
glimpse of Balwant Singh, shirtless, casually writing a letter while his bored 
servant lets droop the morchhal. And had Balwant Singh seen Squirrels in a 
Plane Tree (no. 141), his eyes would have flashed in recognition. 

The Jammu house of Jamwal resisted the Mughal emperor Akbar but 
was forced to submit in 1588. Thereafter, it was compelled to send royal 
hostages to the imperial court until the early eighteenth century. During the 
late seventeenth century, however, Raja Kirpal Dcv (r. ca. 1660-90), of the 
Bahu branch of the house, allied with Chamba, Basohli, and Guler to defeat 
the Mughal viceroy of the Punjab and drive him from the Hills. Painting at 





Jammu is known from the late seventeenth century onward. Its greatest 
flowering occurred under Raja Balwant Singh. 

The collaboration between Raja Balwant Singh and Nainsukh began in 
about 1744, when both were in their early twenties. Nainsukh was from 
Guler. He had been well trained as an exponent of both the Guler and impe- 
rial Mughal idioms, and he merged them harmoniously in his work, espe- 
cially under the encouragement of the raja. The relationship between prince 
and painter is so well expressed by W. G. Archer that I cannot improve upon 
his words: "Nainsukh follows him round as if with a camera, snapping him 
as he finishes his toilet, is shaved by a barber, inspects horses, picnics in the 
country, releases his hawks, or camps beneath a shed. He shows him as 
nothing if not dignified but, at the same time, off-guard or in undress, the 
presiding genius, not of a feudal state, but of a rural household in which the 
humblest servant is allowed his little quirks." 1 

1. W- Archer, Indian Paintings from the Punjab Hills: A Survey, vol. 1, p. 195. 

Published: W. Archer, Indian Miniatures, pi. 82; M. Chandra, Indian Art, pi. on; W. 
Archer, Indian Paintings from the Punjab Hills: A Survey, vol. 1, p. 206, no. 52, vol. 2, 
p. 151, no. 52. 



Among India's more seductive depictions of romantic love are those painted 
in the Punjab Hills during the latter half of the eighteenth century, when 
Mughal naturalism combined with the tender lyricism of local traditions 
and Vaishnavite poetry. The synthesis could not be better exemplified than 
by Krishna and Radha in a Pavilion, a profoundly ecstatic vision of erotic 
passion and spiritual union. Symbolically illuminated by a lightning bolt, 
the godly couple embrace beneath an exuberant profusion of deliciously 
ripe mangoes and luminous flowers laced together by spiraling vines. 

Raja Govardhan Chand of Guler (r. 1741—73) conducted what Ananda 
K. Coomaraswamy describes as "a delicate research into physical charm" 1 
and encouraged his artists to apply the results of his discoveries in idealistic- 
ally amorous pictures. A man of strong opinion, he went to war against the 
Mughal governor of the Jullundur Doab over an argument about a favorite 
horse, and won. The same disciplined, determined power that enabled 
Govardhan Chand triumphantly to enforce a whim may also have inspired 
his artist, who has painted Krishna and Radha not only with immense charm 
but with moving credibility. 

1. W. Archer, Indian Paintings from the Punjab Hills: A Survey, vol. 1, p. 149. 
Published: Brijbhushan, The World of Indian Miniatures, pi. 33. 



274. 

KRISHNA AND RADHA IN A PAVILION 
Punjab Hills, probably Guler, 3rd quarter of 
18th century 

Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 12'/4 x 9 in. (31.1 x 22.9 cm.) 
Miniature: \VA X 7 3 /4 in. (28.3 X 19.7 cm.) 
National Museum, New Delhi 
(51.207/23) 



To honor the occasion of his marriage, which probably took place in 1781, 
Raja Sansar Chand of Kangra commissioned a series of illustrations to the 
Gita Govinda (The Song of the Cowherd), the twelfth-century Bengali court 
poet Jayadeva's story of the ecstatic union of Krishna and Radha, to whom 
the Kangra house were devoted. This page was the opening miniature. Nanda, 
the cowherd who was Krishna's adoptive father, has urged Radha to accom- 
pany Krishna home because he is afraid of the darkness. Graceful as dancers, 
the divine lovers stop to embrace on the bank of the Jamuna River, while 
around them, in a series of arboreal pas de deux, pairs of trees reenact the 
stages of their developing attraction for each other. 

Seeing the Kangra Valley, lush, richly fertile, crossed by a gently flow- 
ing river in sight of the white-capped peaks of the Himalayas, deepens one's 
appreciation of Kangra painting. The supremely pictorial landscape, like 
many of the paintings from the Kangra court, is so prettily, excruciatingly 
beautiful that it very nearly palls. The ancient Kangra dynasty dates from 
as early as the sixth millennium B.C., centuries before the great classical 
Sanskrit epic the Mahabharata (The Book of Wars) was composed. But Kangra 
painting can be traced back no further than the reign of Sansar Chand, who 
came to the throne in 1775 at the age of ten. Sansar Chand was an ambitious 



275. 

KRISHNA AND RADHA: LOVE IN A 
DARK WOOD 

From a manuscript of the Gita Govinda 
(The Song of the Cowherd) of Jayadeva 
Punjab Hills, Kangra, ca. 1780 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 7 X 11 in. (17.8 x 27.9 cm.) 
Miniature: 6 X 9 7 /k in. (15.2 X 25.1 cm.) 
Private collection 



403 




275 



ruler, but he also loved music, dancing, and, especially, art, both paintings 
and brush drawings. The wealth and power of Kangra enabled him to indulge 
his enthusiasm. He hired master painters from Guler, the waning cadet branch 
of the Kangra dynasty, and encouraged them to work in a variant of the 
Guler style, a blend of Hill and Mughal artistic ways (see nos. 272, 274). 

The Gita Gouinda series from which this page comes was painted soon 
after Sansar Chand established his atelier. That he nurtured so remarkable a 
set of paintings, one of Kangra's major creations, when he was only fifteen 
or sixteen years old attests to his intense and precocious interest. Throughout 
his political troubles, his delight in painting never waned. Under his patron- 
age and direction, the work of the Kangra artists, particularly their idyllic 
illustrations to Hindu literature, attained Botticellian grace and refinement. 
(Court portraiture was usually treated less fastidiously.) In time, the reputation 
of Kangra painting assumed almost legendary proportions, far beyond that 
of any of the other Hill schools. In England, its naturalism, sweet poetry, 
and fineness were especially appealing to critics who had been reared in the 
comfortable shade of the Pre-Raphaelites. 

Under his successors, the Kangra style persisted and spread, but without 
Sansar Chand's disciplining attention it soon lost its purity. What had been 
sweet soon became cloying, then coarse. Sansar Chand's wittily aristo- 
cratic elongated ladies in sinuous, subtly colored costumes gave way to a 
generation of pleasing but wilted belles who would have suited Saint 
Valentine's Day cards. Their granddaughters tended to be hardier women, 
dumpy in comparison, with thicker hands, wearing brightly colored dresses 
of little elegance. If their earthy appeal is sometimes warmly sensual and 
they have gained in energy, one nevertheless regrets the passing of their 
ethereal grandmothers. 



405 



276. 

STUDIES OF A TIGER AT REST 
Punjab Hills, late 18th century 
Tinted drawing on paper, 7% x SVi in. 
(18x14 cm.) 

Government Museum and Art Gallery, 
Chandigarh (L-8) 



Tiger hun ting was a favorite pastime of the Rajputs, Mughals, Sikhs, and 
most other Indian rulers — a time to test their mettle and enjoy the sport. 
Orphaned cubs were on occasion brought to palace compounds and reared 
as not quite tamable pets, fascinating to study but risky to handle. This 
amiable feline appears to have been domesticated. It seems to have obliged 
the artist by stretching out in its enclosure, both formally and with almost 
coy, topsy-turvy ease to reveal majestic stripes, a soft underbelly, and massive, 
disquieting paws. 




406 



Intent upon his sensitively accurate study of the marvelous animal, the 
artist has provided no trees, flowers, or figures that might have enabled us 
to place the painting at Kangra, Guler, Lahore, or some other atelier where 
late eighteenth-century Mughal technique and verisimilitude combined with 
the spirit of Hill art. 

Hanuman, the Hindu monkey god, is shown here as one of Rama's force- 
ful helpers at the siege of the demon Ravana's fort at Lanka, an episode from 
the Ramayana (see no. 272). Mountain vast, tall as a great tower, and agile as 
the winds, in one leap Hanuman could soar from Sri Lanka to the Himala- 
yas to bring curative herbs for those wounded in battle. Despite his godly 
powers, he retained engagingly simian characteristics. His great tail, greased 
and ignited for use as a weapon in a hand-to-hand struggle against Ravana, 
brushed against Rama's encampment and set it aflame. 

This image of the benevolent Hanuman, who roars like thunder and 
shakes the earth as he bounds to Rama's aid, was designed and embroidered 
in the Hills, probably at the court of Chamba, where the women in the 
zenana adorned many such coverings for gifts or offerings. Unusually large 
in size and boldly captivating in design, this piece underscores the close 
relationship between court and folk art. Whereas Chamba miniature paint- 
ings of comparable date were influenced by Kangra exquisiteness, this jubi- 
lant textile is zestful as a village festival. 
Published: "Folk Textiles," pp. 279-80. 




277. 

LEAPING HANUMAN 
Punjab Hills, Chamba, late 18th century 
Cotton embroidered with silk and metallic 
thread, 29 7 /h X 4W« in. (76 X 105 cm.) 
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, Helen and 
Alice Colburn Fund (1983.320) 



278 



278. 

GENERAL JEAN-FRANCOS ALLARD 
AND HIS FAMILY 

Inscribed, at top: "painted at Lahore, 1838 
a. d."; in Nastaliq script: "General Allard 
Sahib Bahadur, formerly a commander of 
France, assigned to the army of H. E. Maha- 
raja Ranjit Singh Bahadur Surgaba, may he 
rest in heaven"; and at center: " to the most 
generous Maharaja Ranjit Singh Bahadur in 
the Province of Punjab" 
Lahore, dated 1838 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 8'/ 4 X IOV2 in. 
(21 x 26.7 cm.) 

The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



The Sikh brotherhood, a sect combining aspects of the Muslim faith (chiefly 
worship of one god and a rejection of the caste system) with Hinduism, was 
founded in northern India by the guru Nanak in the late fifteenth century. It 
was not until the early eighteenth century, when Mughal power had begun 
to wane, that what had been essentially a religious community changed 
decisively to a political and military entity with territorial claims. By 1750, 
large Sikh confederacies known as misls (bands of equals) held considerable 
tracts of land. But the many misls were disunited, and although the Sikhs 
took Lahore in 1767, it was only after the advent of their great leader Maha- 
raja Ranjit Singh (r. 1780-1839) that they carved out their own state. Of 
Akbar-like vitality and magnetism, Ranjit Singh, the Lion of the Punjab, 
occupied Lahore in 1799, defeated the Bhangis, the most powerful misl, in 
1801, and in 1802 captured Amritsar, site of the holiest Sikh shrine. Five 
years later he added Ludhiana to his holdings, but in 1809 the British suc- 
ceeded in confining him to lands east of the Sutlej River, thus preventing 
him from aggrandizement beyond the Punjab. 

A small, fiery, eagerly sensual man who was pockmarked and blind in 
one eye from a childhood attack of smallpox, Ranjit Singh had a taste for 
pretty girls and boys and a yen for a drink made from corn liquor, opium, 
musk, and the juices of raw meat, described by the well-traveled English- 
woman Emily Eden as "liquid fire ... of which no European can touch a 
drop.'" Despite these enervating habits, he dominated the Punjab Plains and 
Hills until his death in 1839. 



408 



Ranjit Singh's colorful establishment included a number of European 
soldiers of fortune, one of whom was General Jean-Franqois Allard. Allard 
was born in Saint-Tropez (where his descendants still live) in 1785. He en- 
listed in a regiment of Napoleon's dragoons and at eighteen served in Italy 
for three years. In 1806, he was promoted to sergeant major in Joseph 
Bonaparte's bodyguard, and he later rose to quartermaster in a dragoon 
regiment serving in Spain. After suffering wounds, he was given a lieutenancy 
in the Imperial Dragoons of the Guard, and then became a captain in the 7th 
Hussars. He served under Napoleon during the One Hundred Days and was 
a captain of the Cuirassiers at Waterloo. 

Following the downfall of his hero Napoleon, Allard, still addicted 
to the military life, voyaged east in search of a suitable career. Cairo, 
Tehran, and Kandahar proving unpromising, he went on to Lahore, where 
he arrived in March 1822. He persuaded Ranjit Singh to hire him at ten 
gold mohurs a day to train two regiments, one of dragoons, the other of 
lancers. After successful forays against the Afghans, he was put in charge 
of four regiments totaling 3,000 men and was soon assigned a further artil- 
lery force of 2,000. He married a beautiful woman from Kashmir, fathered 
several children, grew rich, and lived in luxury; at Anarkali, near Lahore, he 
built a splendid mansion (which later belonged to the maharajas of 
Kapurthala). But he never forgot La Belle France. His troops, the Francese 
Campo, flew Lafayette's flag, and on his chest the French Legion of Honor 
was pinned beside the Bright Star of the Punjab, a decoration he had de- 
signed for Ranjit Singh. 

In 1833, distraught by the death of his daughter and the almost simulta- 
neous loss of his savings when the Palmer's Bank in Calcutta collapsed, he 
asked permission to visit France. Ranjit Singh granted his request, but only 
reluctantly, insisting that Allard accept payment for the moneys owed him 
in shawls — 30,000 rupees worth. So the general left for France accompanied 
by wife, children, and bales of textiles. Eighteen months later he returned 
alone to Lahore, and in January 1839 he died there of heart failure. 

Inspired, alas, as much by loneliness as by pride, Allard had this 
Francophile conversation piece painted in Lahore and shortly before his death 
presented it to Ranjit Singh. The miniature was apparently based on a pre- 
liminary sketch for a family portrait Allard commissioned while he was in 
France between 1834 and 1836. The finished oil, by an artist of the Bouilly 
school, remained in Saint-Tropez (it was recently stolen from the Saint- 
Tropez museum, to which it had been lent by Allard's descendants), but 
Allard evidently carried the artist's sketch back to Lahore. In the Indian 
painter's version of the portrait, the romantic general, with his forked beard 
(one end of which he tucked behind his right ear the other behind his left 
when he ate) and wearing the decorations bestowed on him by Ranjit Singh 
and his idol Napoleon, sits surrounded by his family, including the beloved 
daughter he mourned and a son who resembles Bonaparte; the family is 
attended by servants, and the great mansion at Anarkali looms in the 
background — all a delightful commemoration of a curious international 
military life. 

1. Eden, Up the Country, p. 197. 

Published: W. Archer, Paintings of the Sikhs, pp. 82-84; Welch, Room for Wonder, 
pp. 124-25, no. 55; The Indian Heritage, p. 54, no. 108. 



"Singh" means "lion," as is affirmed by this impressive likeness of the man 
who proved his capacity to succeed in the political jungle of the Punjab in the 
years following the death of Maharaja Ranjit Singh in 1839. In India, sitters 
past the first blush of youth were usually portrayed with emphasis on pres- 
tige and character. In one of the most biting characterizations in Indian 
portraiture, Gulab Singh's artist, who had been trained in the Kangra tradition, 
has stressed the maharaja's piercing stare, his turned-down mouth, and his 
jewels and sword, but the imposing attitude is foiled by the three tiny flowers 
he holds, almost mincingly, between thumb and forefinger. 



279. 

MAHARAJA GULAB SINGH OF JAMMU 
AND KASHMIR 

Lahore, ca. 1846 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 10 5 /s X 8 Va in. 
(27x21 cm.) 

Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
(I.S.194-1951) 



409 




<1 279, detail 



280. 

OCCUPATIONS 

By Kehar Singh 

Kapurthala and Lahore, 

3rd quarter of 19th century 

Tinted drawings, 8% X 7'/« in. (22 x 18 cm.) 

Government Museum and Art Gallery, 

Chandigarh (1711, 1431, 1421) 

a. C AJAB SINGH NIHANG, A SIKH HOLY MAN 

Inscribed, at top: " c Ajab Singh 
Nihang caste Bahl Khatri born at 
Nankana"; "painted by Kehar Singh 
at Kapurthala" 

b. A TURNER MAKING CHARPOI LEGS 

C. A MAKER OF METALLIC THREAD OR TAPE 



Gulab Singh, a grand-nephew of Raja Balwant Singh ot Jammu, the 
lively patron of painting (see no. 273), was born in 1792. He was a Rajput, 
not a Sikh, but he joined the army of Ranjit Singh, who admired his effec- 
tiveness as both soldier and statesman. In 1820, following his annexation 
of Kashtwar, Gulab Singh was designated raja and made governor of the 
Jammu Hills, to which Jasrota and Basohli were later added. Contemporary 
accounts of Gulab Singh's personality are sorhewhat contradictory, but fully 
in keeping with this portrait. Emily Eden found him "a horrid character," 1 
but the French scientist Victor de Jacquemont saw him as "a lion in war, but 
anything but a rose-water dandy ■ ■ . remarkably handsome and with the 
simplest, most gentle and elegant manners." 2 And G. T. Vigne, a British 
traveler who met him in 1835, described him as "only one of the better class 
of mounted sepahis (soldiers). . .[whose career] was stained by treachery 
and perfidy." 3 

In 1846, the year ot this portrait, C. Hardinge, nephew of the British 
governor-general, penned a succinct sketch: "Gulab Singh is about 50 years 
in age and not only noted for his political acumen but for his physical activ- 
ity and courage, which has never been disputed; his character also is free 
from those vices which have been attributed to his brothers, Rajahs Dhihan 
and Suchet Singh, and which pervade all orders of the Sikh nation, high and 
low. His features are regular, and the expression of his countenance more 
than usually mild, with an affectation of openness. Indeed, it has been re- 
marked that a 'man might almost take him for his grandmother,' and the 
impression is certainly one which many who have conversed with him would 
form. He has remitted one fifth of the revenue paid by the Hill Chiefs in 
Kashmir, and by abolishing the rite of Sati in the Valley of Kashmir, as well 
as by making lenient settlements, has taken steps to conciliate the feelings of 
the Kashmirians, who have been more or less oppressed by the successive 
governors appointed by the Lahore Durbar." 4 

After Ranjit Singh's death, Gulab Singh gradually emerged as a new 
"Lion of the Punjab." For a few years he was admired by both the British 
and the Sikhs. He was recognized as maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir, and 
the Sikhs lauded him as the savior of the Sikh nation and protector of Ranjit 
Singh's heir, the boy maharaja Dahp Singh. But by 1849, when the Punjab 
was formally annexed to British India, Gulab Singh had already been forced 
from the Sikh political scene and had retired contentedly to his domain. A 
few years later, Dalip Singh, heir to the Sikh kingdom, was taken to England, 
where he bought a splendid estate, was befriended by Queen Victoria, and 
lived out his life in the style of an opulent English squire. 

1. Eden, Up the Country, p. 135. 

2. Jacquemont, Letters from India, p. 179. 

3. Vigne, A Personal Narrative, pp. 250-52. 

4. Hardinge, Recollections of India, pi. 14. 

Published: Goetz, Geschichte der indischen Miniaturmalerei, pi. 16; W. Archer, Paintings 
of the Sikhs, pp. 52-56, 146-48, no. 25, fig. 50; Victoria and Albert Mus cum, Indian 
Art, pi. 49; Zebrowski, "Decorative Arts of the Mughal Period," pp. 175-76, no. 
191; Topsfield, An Introduction to Indian Court Painting, pp. 45-46, pi. 39. 



Kehar Singh, like Ghulam c Ah Khan of the Fraser Album (nos. 49, 50), 
whose work he may have known, was a humble artist whose talent and 
devotion to accurate observation enabled him to transcend the usual limita- 
tions of his period. Working in and near Lahore at a time when assorted 
European, Mughal, and Hill-school influences had reduced most art to 
pastiche, he served as a living camera, recording craftsmen, laborers, and 
other picturesque beings in sets that could have illustrated books on the 
tribes and castes of the Punjab, the sort of publication that was becoming 
popular among the English intelligentsia and their Indian circles. Possessed 
of an eye and feeling for human foibles, a darting, sure brush, and an 
anthropologist's dispassionate curiosity, he was a. masterful draftsman. 

Kehar Singh had a portrait photographer's gift for confronting subjects 
without causing them to freeze in self-consciousness. In the first of these 



280 a 



413 



280b 



three tinted drawings, a Sikh holy man, such as one may still see in the 
Punjab, gazed comfortably at the artist as he worked. M. S. Randhawa 
described the obliging sitter's sect, the Nihangs, as "picturesque survivors 
of the 18th century. This sect was founded by Guru Gobind Singh. Maha- 
raja Ranjit Singh, when he consolidated his power, made use of Nihangs as 
his suicide troops. They were a lawless lot who obeyed no authority. Their 
chief leader was Phoola Singh Akali who played a prominent role in the 
siege of Multan. The Nihangs wear conical blue turbans, on which they 
fasten a number of quoits. They wear cholas and usually carry swords, 
spears and shields on their persons. . . . Their headquarters are at Anandpur 
where they congregate at the Hola festival. They are fanatics and one of the 
sports which they enjoy during the Hola is desecration of the grave of 
Aurangzeb who they call 'Nauranga.' A raised mound is made to symbolize 
the grave of Aurangzeb and it is given shoe beating by parties of Nihangs. 



414 



280 c 



Apart from this pastime Nihangs enjoy drinking bhang, and they have given 
it the name of sukha or giver of pleasure." 1 

Kehar Singh's drawings of the shops of two artisans document their 
activities with encyclopedic thoroughness. Craftsmen, workshops, and tools 
are analyzed and delineated with an exactitude worthy of Diderot's illustrators, 
but it is also evident that the workmen interested Kehar Singh as individuals. 
One is reminded of Akbar's words on portraiture, for the Punjab artist also 
created pictures whereby "those that have passed away have received a new 
life, and those who are still alive have immortality" (see no. 106). 

1. Randhawa, "Two Panjabi Artists," pp. 67-69, figs. 168-78. 
Published: 

a. Randhawa, "Two Panjabi Artists," pp. 67-69, fig. 168. 



V. THE 




BRITISH PERIOD 




THE BRITISH PERIOD 



Like the Mughals and other foreigners who came to India, 
the British were attracted by her legendary riches. Unlike 
the others, whom India absorbed, most ot the British eventu- 
ally returned home, unaware that they had been to some 
degree Indianized. But the depth of Britain's involvement 
with India, the jewel in its crown of empire, is apparent 
from the extraordinary nostalgia still expressed in the Brit- 
ish Isles, nearly forty years after the departure of the last 
viceroy. Although the British in India are usually dismissed 
as greedy representatives of "the nation of shopkeepers," 
in fact many were cast in very different molds, from pirates 
to idealistic administrators, from scholars and artists to 
soldiers and seekers after the curious. Symbolically, the 
first Englishman m India was Ralph Fitch, an eccentric 
preromantic who came on foot in 1583 and explored India 
for several years. 

In the decades following Fitch's extended walk, 
Englishmen came to India in a steady trickle. Most 
were merchants keen to emulate the successes of the Portu- 
guese and Dutch in the spice trade. The East India Com- 
pany was founded in London in 1599, and in 1600 Queen 
Elizabeth granted a charter to "the Governor and company 
of merchants of London trading into the East Indies." But 
the first voyage to Sumatra for spices, as well as silk, gems, 
camphor, and indigo, led to a glut m the pepper market. In 
161 1, discouraged by Dutch and Portuguese control of the 
East Indies trade, the Company opened a factory in India, 
at Machilipatnam, to deal in cotton and other fabrics. The 
following year Surat, near Bombay in western India, became 
the Company's Indian headquarters. 

In 1615, King James I sent Sir Thomas Roe as ambassa- 
dor to the court of the Mughal emperor Jahangir. When 
Sir Thomas showed the emperor English portrait minia- 
tures, Jahangir enthusiastically ordered his artists to make 
copies and challenged the ambassador to detect them 
from the originals. According to the ambassador's own 
account, when he failed the test, due perhaps to poor light 
or an excess of diplomacy, Jahangir "creaked [boasted | like 



a northern man" at his artists' triumph. Sir Thomas's dip- 
lomatic skills also prevailed along other lines; he obtained 
trading privileges for the Company from the emperor in 
exchange for their providing the Mughals with a naval force 
to protect pilgrims on their way to Mecca. His rapport 
with Jahangir and other Indians was prophetic, lor over the 
centuries where other aspiring merchants and colonialists 
— the Portuguese, Dutch, French, and Danes — eventually 
failed the British usually prospered. 

British trade with India gradually increased. By 1641, 
Company factories had been set up at Madras, where the 
British built Fort St. George. Further expansion resulted 
from Emperor Shah Jahan's aversion to the Portuguese, 
who had failed to support him against his father, Jahangir. 
The Portuguese were forcibly driven from Hooghly, their 
major trading center in Bengal, and the Company opened a 
factory there in 1650. In 1661, Bombay also became Com- 
pany territory, as part of the dowry King Charles II re- 
ceived when he married a Portuguese princess, Catherine 
of Braganza. 

Company employees flourished. The career of Boston- 
born Elihu Yale exemplifies the successes that awaited bright 
and enterprising young Englishmen in India during the late 
seventeenth century. Yalejoined the Company as a "writer" 
or clerk in 1671, and he persevered not only for them but 
for himself. By privately investing in Javanese pepper to 
sell in London he raised sufficient capital to acquire merchant 
ships, and in due course he not only married into the En- 
glish aristocracy but was appointed governor of Madras. In 
1714 and 1718, he made small donations of books and tex- 
tiles to the Collegiate School in Saybrook, Connecticut, the 
school that was chartered as Yale University in 1745. Yale 
died in England in 1721 a very rich man and a model for 
the aspiring young. 

Partly due to the erosion of Mughal power but also 
because of their ambition, energy, and toughness, British 
presence in India steadily grew. Irked when the Company 
threatened to take Chittagong in 1685, Emperor Aurangzeb 



< Overleaf, 296a , detail 



(who succeeded Shah Jahan in 1658 and ruled for fifty years) 
seized Surat and ordered all Englishmen to quit his domain. 
But his words rang hollow. In the 1680s, the Mughals were 
hamstrung by the very extent of their territories and drained 
by their continuing campaigns in the Deccan. Far from 
leaving, the English deftly expanded their position, alter- 
nately standing firm against the Mughals and bribing them 
with such presents as clocks, good pieces of ambergrease, 
European fuses, and small field pieces. In 1691, at the little 
village of Kalikata near Hooghly, Job Charnock founded 
Calcutta, the city that was to become the major seat of 
British power in India. To protect the city with its lucrative 
access to the Bhagirathi and Ganges rivers, a convenient 
trade route up-country, Fort William was built in 1696, and 
by 1701 the English governor of Calcutta was powerful 
enough to ban all Mughal ships from the port. The Com- 
pany was granted the privilege of collecting taxes and ad- 
ministering justice in Calcutta and three nearby villages. 

Prior to 1700, most of the Englishmen who sought 
their fortunes in the India trade were hardy, rambunctious, 
and uninhibited, with just enough of the buccaneer in their 
characters to assure success. Job Charnock, who married an 
Indian woman and took pleasure in Indian food and Indian 
ways, typified his generation. Attuned to cooler climates 
and home-grown bacteria, many of these rugged pioneers 
succumbed to fluxes and tropical fevers. By the early eigh- 
teenth century, however, the lot of the British in India had 
so improved that positions with the East India Company 
were not only promising for the up-and-coming but desir- 
able for gentlemen. In the words of an Englishman, Cap- 
tain Alexander Hamilton, writing in about 1720: "Most 
gentlemen and ladies in Bengal live both splendidly and 
pleasantly, the forenoons being dedicated to business and 
after dinner to rest, and in the evenings to recreate themselves 
in chaises or palankeens in the fields, or to gardens, or by 
water in their budgeroes, which is a convenient boat that 
goes swiftly by force of oars. " 1 It was possible to live 
extremely well in India and to retire to England rich as a 
nabob (from the Mughal title nawab, or governor). Stal- 
wart young men of good family now joined the Company 
Brave young women soon followed, but a high percentage 
of them did not survive more than a few monsoons, as is 
tragically apparent from the lichened inscriptions in Calcutta's 
graveyards. 

British power in India was centered in Calcutta in the 
second half of the eighteenth century. In 1756 the nawab of 
Bengal, who like the governors of Oudh and the Deccan 
was virtually independent from imperial Delhi, was an- 
gered by the British because they had aided his enemies, 
the Marathas. He attacked Fort William, seized Calcutta, 
and captured 146 British citizens, whom he confined in the 
so-called Black Hole, a space measuring eighteen by four- 
teen feet. Many died. The Company protested to the nawab, 
and the Council in Madras, hot for vengeance, dispatched 
an army and a fleet led by the illustrious Robert Clive. 
Clive recaptured Calcutta in January 1757, and in June he 
cajoled Mir Ja c far, one of the nawab's generals, into treach- 
erously advising the nawab to yield to the Company force 
at the Battle of Plassey. A few days later the nawab was 
murdered, and as his reward Mir Ja c far was enthroned by 
the British, now the major military power in India. 

Power led to abuse. In 1762 Mir Qasim, son-in-law of 
and successor to Mir Ja c far, wrote a letter of protest: "And 



in this way your gentlemen behave; they make a distur- 
bance all over my country, plunder the people, injure and 
disgrace my servants. . . . Setting up the colours and showing 
the passes of the Company, they use their utmost endeavours 
to oppress the peasants, merchants, and other people of the 
country. . . . They forcibly take away the goods and com- 
modities of the peasants, merchants, etc. for a fourth part 
of their value, and by way of violence and oppression they 
oblige the peasants to give five rupees for what is worth 
but one rupee. " 2 Robert Clive overcame such complaints in 
1765 by compelling the weak Mughal emperor, Shah c Alam 
II (r. 1759-1806), to legalize the Company's position in 
Bengal. The Company was given the right to collect taxes, 
and authority was transferred from the Mughal governor 
to a deputy selected by the British, a puppet through whom 
they held total control. 

Clive's crude methods were replaced by subtler, more 
up-to-date ones following the appointment of Warren 
Hastings as governor-general in 1772. Laws, taxation, and a 
rigorous judicial system now provided the stick with which 
the British controlled India, force being reserved for espe- 
cially trying occasions. In 1773, Shuja c ad-Daula, the nawab 
wazir of Oudh, agreed to pay the Company two and one- 
half million rupees a year for maintaining a troop of Com- 
pany soldiers in Oudh, which simultaneously buttressed 
British interests. The nawab wazir further agreed to re- 
ceive at his court a permanent British resident, who was to 
ensure that Company policies were carried out. This pat- 
tern became standard in British India. 

In his zeal for legality and honorableness, Hastings 
attempted to prohibit private trade among officers of the 
Company, a stand so unpopular that it contributed to his 
removal as governor-general in 1785. Hastings was im- 
peached in 1787 on charges of being a moneymaker and 
oppressor. He was acquitted, but only after a rankling and 
financially draining eight-year trial. Lord Cornwallis, who 
became governor-general in 1786 and served until 1793, 
raised Company salaries during his first year in office and 
made private trading illegal. 

Some of the British became truly devoted to India, 
Indians, and Indian culture. One such Englishman was 
Richard Johnson, who was employed by the Company 
from 1770 to 1790, serving at Lucknow from 1780 to 1782 
and as resident at the court of the nizam of Hyderabad 
from 1784 to 1785. Like Warren Hastings and several other 
English connoisseurs, Johnson developed a taste for Indian 
art, especially Mughal and Rajput miniatures. Unlike most 
of the collections assembled by Englishmen in India, his 
remains intact. He sold the collection to the East India 
Company in 1807, shortly before his death, and it was main- 
tained by the India Office Library in London until recently, 
when it was transferred to the British Library. Another 
Englishman sensitively and creatively appreciative of Indian 
culture was Sir William Jones, one of the founders, with 
Warren Hastings, of the Asiatic Society of Bengal in 1784. 
A judge by profession, Sir William was also an eminent 
scholar: he translated the Indian poet Kalidasa's drama 
Sakuntala, written in the fourth or fifth century in Sanskrit, 
into Latin and English. 

For the elite, by the late eighteenth century Calcutta 
and Madras had become outposts of London. At recep- 
tions and balls, Company employees shone in costumes 
that would have been fashionably of the moment in London 



419 



only six months earlier (the time required for shipment). 
Governor-general Lord Cornwallis, complaining that gen- 
tleman dancers were commonly too far gone in drink to 
venture upon any experiments demanding the preservation 
of the perpendicular, insisted upon improved comportment. 3 
Distinguished couples such as Sir Elijah Impey, chief justice 
of Bengal, and his wife Mary, who hired Indian artists to 
paint family portraits and natural history studies (see no. 281), 
lived in great houses that were tropical transformations of 
grand Palladian designs. 

In 1793 William Roxborough, who had been the 
Company's botanist in the Carnatic, was appointed first 
official superintendent of the Calcutta Botanic Gardens. In 
the name of science, specimens gathered from all over 
India were painstakingly and sensitively rendered in water- 
color on imported English paper by Indian artists trained in 
the Mughal tradition. 

Lured by the promise of ample patronage and the thrill 
of exotic places, English artists came to India. The landscapist 
William Hodges (1744-1797) traveled in India from 1780 to 
1783. Thomas Darnell (1749-1840) and his nephew William 
(1769-1837) spent two years preparing their Views of Calcutta, 
large aquatints published in Calcutta between 1786 and 
1789. The Daniells later visited South India and also went 
up-country to sketch monuments and landscapes in places 
as remote as Garhwal in the Punjab Hills. Tilly Kettle (1735- 
1786) and John Zoffany (1733-1810) also visited India, enjoy- 
ing much success at the court of Oudh, where the nawab 
vied with British patrons for their services. 

India had become so much a part of English life that it 
was included in the Grand Tour of George Annesley 
(Viscount Valencia), who visited Calcutta at the outset of 
the nineteenth century, when the huge Palladian Government 
House had just been completed. To the critics who said the 
building was overly grand, Annesley replied: "Remember 
that India is a country of splendour, or extravagance, and 
of outward appearances; that the Head of a Mighty Em- 
pire ought to conform himself on the prejudices of the 
country he rules over; and that the British, in particular, 
ought to emulate the splendid works of the Princes of the 
House of Timur, lest it be supposed that we merit the 
reproach which our great rivals the French have ever cast 
upon us, of being influenced by a sordid mercantile spirit. 
In short, I wish India to be ruled from a palace, not from a 
counting house; with the ideas of a prince, not those of a 
retail dealer in muslins and indigo. " 4 By 1800 the Company 
officialdom of Calcutta, Madras, and Lucknow had become 
so worldly that serious interest in India of the sort evinced 
by Warren Hastings, Richard Johnson, and Sir William 
Jones was considered bad form, suited only to scholars and 
eccentrics. Nevertheless, British India prospered, even as 
its representatives became ever more remote from the peo- 
ple they increasingly dominated. 

Richard Wellesley, governor-general from 1798 to 1805, 
signed a treaty in 1798 with the nizam of Hyderabad 
whereby the nizam agreed to expel all French officers, to 
accept a British resident, and to support six battalions of 
Company troops. In 1801 the British annexed the Carnatic 
and Oudh, and a few years later Arthur Wellesley (the 
future Duke of Wellington) won the Deccan, defeating a 
Maratha and French alliance of 290,000 troops with his 
army of 55,000. At about the same time Lord Lake took 



Delhi and Agra, the Marathas sued for peace, and the 
Maratha leader Daulat Rao Sindhia accepted a resident at 
his court. In 1803 the British became the protectors of Shah 
c Alam II, recognizing him as emperor but disregarding his 
wishes on all levels. The British resident at Delhi had in 
effect assumed what remained of imperial power. 

The East India Company had become a powerful inde- 
pendent government with a bureaucracy larger than that of 
many nations. To prepare cadets for careers in India, the 
Company established Haileybury College in London. In 
1813, on the urging of high-minded evangelicals who were 
eager to reform "the people of Hindostan, a race of men 
lamentably degenerate and base," the British Parliament 
passed the Charter Act, which declared its sovereignty over 
the Company's expanding dominions. Company representa- 
tives continued to administer the British-held areas of India, 
but they now did so in trust for the British government. 

During the early nineteenth century the British made 
extensive progress into the interior of India, gaining para- 
mountcy over Rajputana (Rajasthan) through what were 
called defensive alliances. From 1817 to 1823, the rulers of 
the states of Kotah, Mewar, Bundi, Kishangarh, Bikaner, 
Jaipur, and many others received British political agents 
and often paid tribute. 

With increasing British control, many age-old Indian 
practices such as slavery and female infanticide were discour- 
aged or outlawed. In 1829 sati, the self-immolation of wid- 
ows on their husbands' funeral pyres, was declared illegal 
in Bengal. In the same year William Sleeman was assigned 
to investigate and eliminate thugs (from the Hindi word 
thag, meaning thief), "who sallying forth in a gang . . . 
and in the character of wayfarers . . . fall in with other travel- 
lers on the road and having gained their confidence, take a 
favourable opportunity of strangling them by throwing 
their handkerchiefs round their necks, and then plundering 
them and burying their bodies." 5 Three thousand thugs 
were convicted between 1831 and 1837, and by 1860 they 
had virtually disappeared. Despite such worthy paternalism, 
in 1833 Parliament took over the Company's possessions 
and established an Indian Law Commission with the aim of 
codifying a system of law and justice. 

English was declared the official language of India by 
the British in 1835, and English was made the language of 
instruction in higher education, inasmuch as the purpose of 
education was seen as the dissemination of Western knowl- 
edge. Lord Macaulay, in his Education Minute, proposed 
the creation in India of an elite "Indian in blood and colour, 
but English in taste, morals, and intellect." In thirty years, 
he forecast, "there would not be a single idolator among 
the respectable classes of Bengal. " By 1845, however, among 
the 17,360 Indian pupils being educated at government ex- 
pense in all parts of India there were 13,699 Hindus, 1,636 
Muslims, and 236 Christians. 

The Mutiny of 1857, seen by many as a war of liber- 
ation, by some as a conservative reaction to the modern- 
ization forced on India by British rule, was the inevitable 
consequence of many years of accumulated offense, aggra- 
vated by the widening rift between the rulers and the ruled. 
Indian religious leaders, princes, landlords, and intellectu- 
als alike challenged British authority. Smoldering resentment 
caught fire in January 1857, when the Brown Bess rifle was 
replaced by the Enfield in the Indian army. Rumor spread 



420 



among the sepoys (Indian troops) that the cartridge for the 
Enfield, one end of which had to be bitten off, was lubri- 
cated with beef or hog fat, the former considered alarm- 
ingly contaminating by Hindus, the latter by Muslims. On 
February 26, in Bengal, soldiers refused to use the Enfield. 
Although no British troops were present the regiment was 
marched to Barrackpore, near Calcutta, and placed in irons. 
On March 29, the imprisoned soldiers were liberated and 
their officers were shot by comrades from other regiments. 
The mutineers then hurried to Delhi, where they persuaded 
the aged Emperor Bahadur Shah II to lead the growing 
rebellion. Although at this time only 40,000 of the 300,000 
men in the Indian army were Europeans, the British eventu- 
ally defeated the mutineers in a struggle notable for the 
atrocities carried out on both sides. In the aftermath, the 
British tried Bahadur Shah and condemned him to exile. 
The last Mughal emperor died a prisoner in Rangoon in 
1862 (see no. 287). 

In 1858, Queen Victoria issued a proclamation that 
was read throughout India: "For divers weighty reasons, 
we have resolved, by and with the advice of the Lords 
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in Parliament 
assembled, to take upon ourselves the government of the 
territories of India, heretofore administered in trust for us 
by the Honourable East India Company." The title of 
governor-general became viceroy, and the Company's army 
was absorbed into the Royal Army. 

After the Mutiny, British attitudes toward Indians 
hardened. John Lawrence, who served as viceroy from 1864 
to 1869, aptly stated the post- Mutiny mood: "We have not 
been elected or placed in power by the people, but we are 
here through our moral superiority, by force of circum- 
stances, by the will of providence. This alone constitutes 
our charter to govern India. In doing the best we can for 
the people, we are bound by our conscience, not by theirs. " 6 

Queen Victoria was proclaimed empress of India in 
1877. The Indian states and their princes and people were 
now vassals of the British sovereign. Lord Lytton (viceroy 
1876-80) concluded that the government of India should 
seek support from at least one level of society and pro- 
posed that it be the aristocracy. The days of glamorously 
rich maharajas had come. They were soon joined by great 
Indian industrialists like Jamshed Tata, who opened the 
Empress Cotton Mill at Nagpur in 1887 and in 1907 founded 
the Tata Iron and Steel Company. 

In 1901, the Raj seemed as permanent as Mount Everest, 
but the discouraging evaluation of a little-known English- 
man, F. H. Skrine, proved to be a flash of foresight: "Here 
we stand on the face of the broad earth, a scanty, pale-faced 
band in the midst of three hundred millions of unfriendly 
vassals." 7 Forty-six years later, in March of 1947, Earl 
Mountbatten of Burma (great-grandson of Queen Victoria) 
became the last viceroy of India, and in August India and 
Pakistan became independent nations. 



1. Hamilton, quoted in Woodruff, The Men Who Ruled India, 
p. 76. 

2. Mir Qasim, quoted in ibid., p. 106. 

3. Kincaid, British Social Life in India, p. 120. 

4. Annesley, Voyages and Travels, p. 235. 

5. Yule and Burnell, Hobson-Jobson, p. 916. 

6. Lawrence, quoted in Edwardes, Memorials of the Life and 
Letters, vol. 2, p. 192. 

7. Skrine, Life of Sir W. W. Hunter, p. 68. 



421 



281 

FOUR WATERCOLORS PAINTED FOR 
MARY, LADY IMPEY 
Probably by Shaikh Zain ad-Din of Patna 
Calcutta, Company School, 1777-83 
Opaque watercolor on paper 

a. A FAIRY BLUEBIRD (iretta puella) 
Inscribed: "pear tree, blue fairy, Zain ad-Din' 
21 x 28% in. (53.3 x 73.4 cm.) 

Private collection 

b. SAMBAR (cervus unicolor) 
I6I/2X 211/4 in. (42x54 cm.) 
Collection Sven Gahlin, Bath, England 

C. MARY, LADY IMPEY, SUPERVISING HER 
HOUSEHOLD 

18x21 in. (45.7 x 53.3 cm.) 
Collection Lawrence Impey Esq., 
Hampshire, England 

d. THE IMPEY CHILDREN WITH THEIR 
ATTENDANTS 

14x20-% in. (35.6 x 51.8 cm.) 
Collection Lawrence Impey Esq., 
Hampshire, England 



Mary, Lady Impey, wife of Sir Elijah Impey, who was chief justice of Ben- 
gal from 1774 to 1782, lived in Calcutta between 1777 and 1783. During her 
brief stay, she employed three artists who signed themselves "of Patna" 
— Shaikh Zain ad-Din, a Muslim, and Bhawani Das and Ram Das, who 
were both Hindus — to paint a series of natural history studies. All three art- 
ists had been trained in the naturalistic Mughal tradition, which appealed 
directly to English taste, and they adapted comfortably to the technique of 
English watercolor on imported English Whatman paper, which came in 
larger sheets than could be readily found in India. Conceivably, these artists 
had already moved from Patna to Calcutta and were employed as natural 
history painters there prior to Lady Mary's arrival. If not, their earliest works 
for her, signed and dated to the year of her arrival, imply that they adjusted 
to the foreign Company manner with amazing speed — which would cer- 
tainly have been possible, considering the disciplined tradition from which 
they had emerged. 

Shaikh Zain ad-Din appears to have been senior among them. His pic- 
tures are the most inventive, touching, and painterly. His brushwork varied 
from hard-edged to soft, and he took pleasure in building up glowing pas- 
sages of rounded, ample forms, often in palettes of startling originality. A 
bold yet gentle designer, he silhouetted his subjects amid ornamental 
profusion, simultaneously conveying their outer shapes with scientific accu- 
racy and expressing their essences. He was also the most prolific of the 




281a 



three, but his work was uneven in quality; when he was bored by a picture, 
so are we. 

Two hundred or more studies of flora and fauna, which are equaled for 
artistic discrimination only by those done for William Fraser (see. nos. 49, 
50), commemorate Lady Impey's few years of patronage. Like the natural 
history studies painted in India for other private patrons and for the Com- 
pany at their extensive gardens and menageries near Madras and Calcutta, 
the Impey series was probably commissioned more in the name of science 
than of art. Most of the pictures from the Impey collection are life-sized 
studies, but when the subject was too large, the precise measurements were 
penciled on the page. 

The Impey pictures of birds, animals, and fish are the earliest dated 
examples of this genre painted for the British in India. They are also the 
liveliest, and they are outstanding for their sensitive and accurately observed 
depictions of flowers, foliage, and insects, which lend further credibility to 
the subjects. The Impey estate in Calcutta included a large garden, with 
ample space for a zoo and ornithological collections. (We have already seen a 
"jewel" of feathers, no. 184, plucked from a bird named in homage to the 
Impeys' contributions to ornithology.) 1 The convincing vivacity of their 
work argues that the artists painted from life, instead of struggling to reani- 
mate bird and animal skins or stuffed specimens. 

Both the studies reproduced here were originally signed by Zain ad- 




Din. A Fairy Bluebird, painted at the outset of the Impey project, reveals 
traces of his Mughal training, perhaps at Lucknow, especially in the enamellike 
burnishing of pigments on the bird's eye and on the undersides of the guava 
leaves, with their rhythmically decorative veining. Following the procedure 
of his artistic ancestor, Mansur, the shaikh feathered this bright-eyed bird 
with minute brushstrokes. The engaging pose of the bird, camouflaged against 
a leaf; the delightful combination of blue, black, and green; and the subtle 
composition, the sinuously curving foliage balanced by large areas of open 
space, are all characteristic of the artist's original insight. The young female 
elk that posed for Sambar must have been a pet. The sambar is the largest 
Indian deer — a full-grown stag can weigh 700 pounds — but the Impey 
specimen, with her sensitive mask and sleek blue-gray coat, seems delicate 
as a gazelle. 

Sir Elijah's years in Calcutta, which coincided with Warren Hastings's 
controversial term as governor-general, ended prematurely. (Four years after 
his return to England, he was humiliatingly impeached. But the charges 
were politically motivated and patently flimsy, and he spoke so eloquently, 
feelingly, and convincingly before the bar of the House of Commons that 
the case against him was shattered.) In anticipation of the Impeys' departure 
from Calcutta in 1783, these two paintings of their Indian domicile were 
commissioned. Mary, Lady Impey, Supervising Her Household and The Impey 
Children with Their Attendants are unequaled as nostalgic glimpses into late 
eighteenth-century Calcutta life among the upper classes. They can be attrib- 
uted to Shaikh Zain ad-Din, who again reveals his Mughal training in the 
formally isolated figures and their proportions, as well as in the masterful 




arabesque patterns. Many enlivening touches — the peep into the Impey 
bedroom, with its four-poster bed and its dressing table laden with an arrange- 
ment of jars, brushes, and other appurtenances; the little Impeys scampering 
with their puppies or attended by devoted ayahs — must have been closely 
directed by Lady Impey, who deserves much of the credit for these 
entrancingly intimate Bengali conversation pieces. 

1. I would like to thank Katharine Ray for making available to me the findings of 
her research on the Impeyan pheasant. 

Published: 

a. Hayter and Falk, Birds in an Indian Garden, no. 3. 

b. In the Image of Man, p. 106, no. 45. 

c. Archer, "British Patrons of Indian Artists," pp. 340-41, no. 3057; W. Archer, 
Indian Miniatures, pi. 100; Welch, Room for Wonder, pp. 23-24, fig. 3. 

d. Archer, "British Patrons of Indian Artists," pp. 340-41; Edwards, The British in 
India, no. c4, pi. 3. 



International cultural exchanges bore fruit in this portrait of a festooned 
and plumed odalisque attended by a mildly lascivious cockatoo. The three 
muses, an Ottomanesque tabouret, sphinxes, classical pediments, and a be- 
wigged lion licking what appears to be a vegetarian ice-cream cone further 
enrich the confection, which was painted for a connoisseur who may have 
taken it more seriously than we do. 

Just as Akbar and Jahangir had urged their artists to borrow European 
exoticisms from engravings and other imported works of art, so did later 



282. 

ODALISQUE WITH A PARROT 

Mughal, Lucknow or Delhi, early 19th century 

Opaque watercolor on paper 

Folio: 13-/8 x \7V 4 in. (34 x 45 cm.) 

Miniature: 10 7 /h X 15 in. (27.5 x 38 cm.) 

Chester Beatty Library, Dublin 

(Ms. 69, no. 19) 



425 




282 



patrons. In the early nineteenth century, highly skilled Indian painters plucked 
motifs from European prints with as much rapacity as conviction. Although 
one might suppose that pictures of this sort were commissioned for British 
households in India, they are more likely to have been painted for Indian 
aristocrats during the awkward years when Indians bravely adjusted to the 
foreign ways of the new Raj. Unused to European furniture, disinclined to 
sip tea or munch gateaux and crumpets, rajas and nawabs nevertheless gener- 
ously redecorated erstwhile halls of public audience and, tolerating extreme 
discomfort, smilingly received distinguished British guests. 

Published: The Indian Heritage, p. 52, no. 93. 



283. 

CAVALCADE OF THE KING OF OUDH 

AND THE BRITISH RESIDENT 

Mughal, Lucknow, ca. 1820 

Bronze, 7>/ 2 x \5Vi x Wi in. 

(19.1 x 39.4x 24.1 cm.) 

Ashmolean Museum, Oxford (1977.25) 



This festive and amusing procession in bronze illustrates the protocol-ridden, 
tragicomic complexities of Indian politics during the early nineteenth century. 
Lord Moira (governor-general 1812-23), urged by the Company's resident 
at Delhi to abolish the title of emperor and further weaken the sovereignty 
of Akbar Shah II (r. 1806-37), proposed instead that the Mughal ruler be 
demeaned by a subtle plot: the nawab wazir of Oudh, Ghazi ad-Din Haidar 
(r. 1814-27), was to be named king. In 1819, George III bestowed the au- 
gust title on Ghazi ad-Din, who had earned it by lending the Company 
huge sums of money. But lest the former nawab wazir be overly honored, 
the governor-general insisted that the British resident at Lucknow be treated 
as his equal on all ceremonial and formal occasions. 

Hats and elephants are crucial to the iconography here. Mounted on a 
state elephant, accompanied by his chief minister, Ghazi ad-Din proudly 



426 



wears his new crown. On an equally large elephant rides the resident, wear- 
ing a chapeau bras, and next to him sits an adviser in a shovel hat. The king 
was described by Reginald Heber, lord bishop of Calcutta at the time, as a 
weak man who was dominated by a sinister, "dark, harsh, hawk-nosed" 
former butler named Agha Mir, who in addition to his princely salary was 
granted 23 million rupees a year as well as a bonus of 33 million. 1 If we are to 
believe history's allegations (which may come from biased sources), Agha 
Mir also plundered property and jewels galore. 

Inasmuch as bronze figural sculpture had not been encouraged at Mughal 
courts, this piece, based on European example to satisfy a new market, 
would have been sculpted and cast by craftsmen whose previous repertoire 
had consisted of village icons and toys. Technically remarkable for casting 
and complexity, it invites comparison with early folk bronzes (see nos. 58-68). 

1. Heber, Narrative of a Journey, vol. 2, p. 53. 

Published: Digby and Harle, Toy Soldiers, pp. 9-10, pi. 8. 




427 




284. 

EMPEROR BAHADUR SHAH II 
ENTHRONED 

Inscribed with the names and titles of 
the four subjects 

Mughal, Delhi, dated a. h. 1254 (1838) 
Opaque watercolor on paper, \2Vh X \4Vi in. 
(30.8x36.8 cm.) 

The Knellington Collection, Courtesy 
Harvard University Art Museums, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



Titles grow as power declines, as is evident from a sampling of those 
inscribed on this portrait of the last Mughal emperor Bahadur Shah II 
(r. 1837-58): His Majesty the Shadow of God, Refuge of Islam, Propagator of 
the Muslim Religion, Increaser of the Splendor of the Community of the 
Paraclete, Progeny of the Gurganid (Mughal) Dynasty, Choicest of the Race 
of the Sahibqiran (Tamerlane), Exalted King of Kings, Emperor and Son of 
Emperor, Sultan and Son of Sultan, Possessed of Glories and Victories. 

Toweringly crowned, weighted down with gold, pearls, emeralds, and 
epaulettes of gilded fur, and glorified by a radiant pale blue and gold halo, 
the emperor smokes a huqqa in the khas mahal, the private apartments in 
the Red Fort of Delhi. He is accompanied by two of his sons: Mirza Fakhr 
ad-Din, the heir apparent, and young Mirza Farkhanda. In the background, 
an attendant waves a morchhal. 

Bahadur Shah II inherited the throne at the age of sixty-two, expecting 
that in his long-lived family (his father Akbar II died at eighty-two) he 
might reign for as long as twenty years. As a young man he had been a fine 
horseman with strength enough to draw the mightiest bows, which he aimed 
more accurately than anyone else in Delhi. All his life he hungered for 
mangoes. In his youth he could eat thirty at a sitting, but when he was older 
fifteen once made him ill for months. He was an able calligrapher and pi- 



428 



ously copied verses from the Qur 3 an; he delighted in planning gardens and 
buildings; and he was a connoisseur of women, literature, and music. His 
nom de plume as a poet was Zafar, and he signed his music Shauq Rang 
(Melody of Longing). At a time of imperial greatness Bahadur Shah might 
have been a Shah Jahan. It was his misfortune to be enthroned on a pastiche 
Peacock Throne in a dirt-streaked marble palace — always under the suspicious 
eye of a British agent — with no armies, no strong allies, and an empty treasury. 

Until the Mutiny in 1857, Bahadur Shah's life was devoted to literature 
and to family matters. Inasmuch as he had many wives and children, and in 
1848 as many as 2,104 descendants of the imperial family were living on his 
benevolence in the Fort in Delhi, he found it necessary to encourage formal 
gifts from visitors and to cadge money as best he could. But the financial 
management of his household in such straitened circumstances was not the 
worst of his domestic problems. His favorite wife, Zinat-Mahal Begum, who 
was seventeen and he sixty-two when they married, ferociously promoted the 
cause of their son, Mirza Jawan Bakht, as heir apparent over Bahadur Shah's 
eldest son, Mirza Fakhr ad-Din. Because he was admired and trusted by the 
citizens of Delhi and by Sir Thomas Metcalf, the Company agent, Fakhr 
ad-Din was confirmed as heir. But shortly thereafter, Sir Thomas and other 
Englishmen who had participated in the decision died mysteriously. Delhi 
rumor accused Zinat-Mahal of the crimes, and in 1856, when Mirza Fakhr 
ad-Din died suddenly under comparably odd circumstances, the begum was 
blamed with increased conviction. 

When in 1857 the mutinous sepoys of Bengal marched to Delhi and 
begged Bahadur Shah to lead them, he agreed. Such a gamble appealed to 
the very old man, who, oppressed by Company rule, virtually powerless and 
moneyless, had long dreamed of restoring Mughal ascendancy (see no. 287). 

Behind the emperor's halo and plumed crown (which was bought at 
auction by Queen Victoria for £500 after the Mutiny), we glimpse the pierced 
marble jali in the khas mahal and above it the marble relief showing the 
scales of justice balanced on a crescent moon. The miniature is flawlessly 
drawn and colored down to the last golden flourish, but it lacks the palpabil- 
ity that makes earlier Mughal painting so forcefully immediate. Was the 
artist hinting that the emperor's unfocusing eyes had been forced inward, 
that the emeralds of his crown were flawed and his "gold" lions starved, and 
that justice — of which he received so little — was no longer his to bestow? 

Published: Welch, Room for Wonder, pp. 118-19, no. 52; Welch, Imperial Mughal Painting, 
pp. 118-19, pi. 40; The Indian Heritage, pp. 54-55, no. 109. 



This spectacularly large and detailed picture — the most informative and 
lively description of the Red Fort prior to its partial dismantling by the 
British after the Mutiny — was painted not for a Mughal but for a great 
Rajput patron, Maharao Ram Singh II of Kotah (r. 1828-66). Like the Delhi 
visits of other Rajput rulers, his was no mere courtly act. During the final 
glow of imperial sunset, the Mughal emperor was still revered as Hindustan's 
greatest ruler, privileged to bestow and confirm titles on maharajas and nawabs. 
He was also the living embodiment of a still creative and influential culture. 

Bahadur Shah II's piety, literary and philosophical turn of mind, and 
advanced age had not sapped the court of mirth or love of life. Nor had they 
ended factional rivalries, scandal in the harem, or youthful high spirits. The 
emperor himself took pleasure in animal and bird combats, circus per- 
formances, pigeon breeding, dancers and musicians, and, of course, poetry. 
He also enjoyed the superb imperial cuisine — although his appetite faltered 
after someone attempted to murder him with a succulent kebab lcthally 
spiked with the whisker of a tiger. If the maharao's visit was partly formal, 
he also went to Delhi for amusement, for an urban fling, and to enjoy the gossip. 

A royal progress from Kotah to Delhi was a considerable undertaking 
in 1842. Priests, wives, dancing girls, musicians, artists, cooks, soldiers, 
courtiers, and a mob of servants were packed onto elephants, camels, and 



285. 

MAHARAO RAM SINGH II OF 
KOTAH VISITING EMPEROR 
BAHADUR SHAH II 

Inscribed with names of individuals and places 

Rajasthan, Kotah, ca. 1842-43 

Opaque watercolor on cotton, 

14 ft. 10 in. x 8 ft. 6 in. (4.45 X 2.59 m.) 

Rao Madho Singh Museum Trust, Kotah (1003) 



429 




285 



285, detail > 




horses in a great procession, which halted along the route, either visiting the 
forts and palaces of friends or staying in tents. Ram Singh was a blithesome 
ruler with a sense of humor (to jollify his court he once coaxed an elephant 
to mount the palace roof), and he urged his wittiest and most observant 
artist to record worthwhile moments during his imperial outing. This bird's- 
eye view of the Mughal capital, in which about twenty monuments are 
identified by the artist's inscriptions and which includes the neighboring 
markets, the Jami c Masjid, and views along the bank of the Jamuna, bubbles 
over with anecdotes and comical observations. Beaky nosed Bahadur Shah, 
in the upper left corner, accompanied by attendants and an Englishman (the 
Company agent?), has climbed to the highest level of the Fort's ramparts 
and seems to be attempting to sight his Kotah visitor through a brass spyglass. 
Meanwhile, Maharao Ram Singh, in the company of a priest, gazes at the 
Mughal bastions from the opposite side of a stream. Immediately behind 
them a monkey wearing a pointed cap and sitting imperiously beneath an 
awning also surveys the imperial prospect. Inside the palace, in the upper 
right corner, a cracker-jawed old begum protects the moral tone by keeping 
watch from a zenana window. Shopkeepers, craftsmen, pigeons, horses, 
scurrying dogs, elephants, leaping goats, and fighting camels crowd the 
byways. In the lower half of the painting and along its lower right edge, in 
the holy forecourt of the Jami c Masjid, a European couple appear locked in 
an embrace, and in a nearby enclosure an impatient elephant strains at 
its chains. 

The artist's record of the Red Fort and environs is of great historical 
interest. Although he has compacted, bent, or twisted most of the buildings, 
courtyards, gardens, and streets to fit his upright rectangle, all were noted, 
usually in great detail. Besides the Jami c Masjid, three mosques are depicted: 
the Sonehri, Moti, and Fatehpuri masjids. The grand European style pillared 



432 




house and gardens of the notorious Christian Begum Samru are shown on 
the other side of the main thoroughfare. A former dancing girl who married 
a German, the begum became a great landowner at Sardhana, where she 
built a cathedral and maintained her own bishop. On the left side of the 
painting, below the bridge to Salimgarh, is the Nigambodh ghat with its 
temple complex with bathing platforms adjoining the fort walls. Within the 
fort, kitchens and stables are depicted at full tilt, and the pool around Bahadur 
Shah's garden pavilion at top left is asplash with swimmers. The pastiche 
replacement of the Peacock Throne occupies the diwan-i khas at top center. 
The gilded copper cupolas, which were later sold as scrap by the British, are 
plainly visible, as is much of the landscaping and the pavilions, most of 
which have been destroyed. Beneath the zenana at the right, the diwan-i 
am, which has since been cleaned down to the red sandstone, is shown 
radiant with its original chinar (polished white lime). 

The unidentified master of this painting carried on the tradition of Kotah, 
where most of the artists were accomplished craftsmen who continuously 
sketched from life (see nos. 241, 242, 245). While in Delhi, he must have fol- 
lowed Ram Singh everywhere, taking notes at royal command of curious 
personages, animals, furniture, architectural details, and landscapes in his 
dashingly calligraphic style. On his return to Kotah the drawings and 
diagrams, some of which have survived, served as aides-memoire for this 
giant tour de force, which must have been a major attraction when it hung 
at court. (The painting was later stored rolled up and brought out only for 
occasional delectation.) Although this pictorial travel diary developed from 
the minds of Ram Singh and his leading artist, one assumes that some of it 
was executed by other painters and apprentices in the Kotah atelier, which 
Ram Singh kept busy recording all — some might say too many — aspects of 
his sometimes ribald life. 



286. 

THE POET GHALIB 
Inscribed: "picture of the noble 
Ghalib of Delhi" 
Mughal, Delhi, ca. 1855 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 8-y« x 7 in. (21.3 x 17.8 cm.) 
Miniature: 6 7 /« X 5 in. (17.5 X 12.7 cm.) 
Red Fort Museum, Delhi (286) 



Mirza Asadui.i ah Khan Ghalib (1797-1869), perhaps the most admired of 
all Mughal poets, wrote movingly in both Persian and Urdu. He began 
writing Urdu verse at nine, but after he had compiled his first collected 
works, when he was twenty-three, he preferred to compose in Persian. His 
many letters provide vital and detailed accounts of nineteenth-century Mughal 
life. At times visionary, at others serious or witty in his writing, he was also 
a man of immense charm and on intimate terms with many of the aristo- 
cratic families of Delhi, Lucknow, and elsewhere. Occasionally unorthodox 
in his behavior, he was fined on a charge of gambling in 1841, and in 1847 he 
was imprisoned for maintaining a gaming house. But the stigma of a short 
stint in prison was soon erased by invitations to the imperial court, where he 
was commissioned by Bahadur Shah II to write a history of the Mughals in 
Persian prose. 

Until he was close to sixty years old, Ghalib was almost always short of 
adequate funds to support himself, his wife, and her two orphaned nephews, 
whom he adopted. But his situation improved in 1854 when he was ap- 
pointed ustad to the heir apparent, Fakhr ad-Din (see no. 284), and at about 
the same time he was awarded an annual stipend by the king of Oudh, Wajid 
c Ali Shah. He also wrote a letter requesting a grant from Queen Victoria. 
When Fakhr ad-Din died (or was killed) two years later, Ghalib was ap- 
pointed ustad to Bahadur Shah. 

This sensitive but formal likeness was painted by one of the last impe- 
rial court artists when Ghalib was at the pinnacle of his success, a participant 
in the all-night literary gatherings, called mushai c ras, that were organized at 
the Red Fort by the emperor and his heir apparent. For these artistically 
serious and ceremonious occasions, special verses were composed on set 
themes. Ghalib was noted for his dramatically effective readings. Had not 
the Mutiny ended his career at court and dashed his hopes for patronage 
from Queen Victoria, his later years might well have been more prosperous. 

As it was, although the poet survived the horrors of the siege and its 
aftermath, he was suspected of complicity for allegedly composing an in- 
scription for the imperial coinage, several of his friends were executed, and 
his brother's house was broken into by British soldiers. Troubled by ill health, 




286 



287 



he nevertheless continued to work, serving as ustad to amateur poets and 
writing verse, criticism, and quantities of letters. Eventually he gained the 
favor of the British, and he received occasional stipends from his wealthiest 
disciple, the nawab of Rampur. When Ghalib died in 1869 at the age of seventy- 
three, most of the nobles and eminent men of Delhi attended his funeral. 



Following the Mutiny, Bahadur Shah II was tried by the British and con- 
victed of treason and rebellion. All royal property and revenues, as well as 
the monthly stipend of 10,000 rupees, were appropriated, and the former 
emperor and his household were exiled to Rangoon. The royal party of 
seventeen (six family members, three courtesans, and eight servants) lived 
in tents for their first few months in Rangoon. Later a teak wood house on 
stilts with four rooms, two bathrooms, and a small kitchen was constructed 
for them. Bahadur Shah occupied one of the sixteen-foot-square rooms; 
Zinat-Mahal Begum, Mirza Jawan Bakht and his family, and Mirza Shah 
c Abbas and his mother, one of the concubines, lived in the other three rooms. 
The remaining prisoners were billeted in an old barracks beyond the ten- 
foot-high colonnade of the "palace." All were in the charge of Captain 
Davies, a kind and well-mannered British officer who spoke Urdu. He saw 
to it that they were adequately fed on the 430 rupees a month each person 
was allotted (eleven rupees a day plus an extra allowance on Sunday). 

In exile, Bahadur Shah continued to compose poetry under his pen 
name, Zafar, during his remaining two and a half years. In 1862, at the age 
of eighty-seven, he was eased into death by a series of strokes over a period 
of eleven days. A few hours after he died he was buried without public 
ceremony, with neither tomb nor cenotaph, in a patch of earth surrounded 
by a simple bamboo fence that soon followed the last Mughal emperor into 
oblivion. His last direct descendant, who might have been the claimant to an 
empire, died recently in Calcutta. 

This sensitive portrait was taken by an English military photographer, 
perhaps, as Howard Ricketts has suggested, a man called Captain Tytler. 1 
The photograph is a moving record of the pathos of Bahadur Shah's last 
days, when he was afflicted with hiccups and his eyes were becoming glazed. 

1. Personal communication, 1984. 

Published: Worswick, The Last Empire, p. 76. 



287. 

BAHADUR SHAH II ON HIS DEATHBED 
Perhaps by Captain Tytler 
Rangoon, ca. 1862 

Salt print, 4Vi X 5Vi in. (10.8 X 14 cm.) 
Collection Howard and Jane Ricketts, London 



435 



288. 

PALANQUIN 

Rajasthan, probably Jaipur, ca. 1840 

Gilded silver and gold, 11 ft. Wi in. X 3 ft. 1 in 

(94 cm. x 3.84 m.) 

Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum, 
Jaipur (AG) 



Maharaja Ram Singh II of Jaipur (r. 1834-80) came to the throne as an 
infant and reigned during the years when Rajput princes were adjusting to 
British ways. Without sacrificing traditional values, Ram Singh modernized 
his state by building and supporting colleges, hospitals, and charitable and 
learned societies. He was a devout Hindu, a worshiper of Shiva, but he was 
also the first great prince to master ballroom dancing and cut quite a figure 
as the vicereine's partner at Simla balls. 

One of Ram Singh's many enthusiasms was photography. With the 
help of an Englishman named T. Murray, he set up studios and darkrooms 
in the palace and later established a photographic training school. Many of 
the photographs he took with Murray have survived, and they document the 
changes brought to Rajasthan by the British. In addition to many portraits 
and self-portraits and studies of sword hilts and ornamental glazed pottery 
made in Jaipur workshops, there are scenes of Britishers and Anglophile 
Rajputs riding to hounds, views of a bridge under construction and of the 
building of Rajasthan College, and photographs of Parsi actors in Shake- 
spearean costume. 

This splendid palanquin from Jaipur recalls the opulent magnificence of a 
great Rajput court in pre-Mutiny British India. Richly ornamented in a style 
uniting Hindu, Mughal, and early Victorian florescences, the palanquin is 
still brought out on religious occasions. But one likes to imagine Maharaja 
Ram Singh II being carried in it, at night, through City Palace corridors 
lighted only by torches. Inasmuch as Jaipur is noted for its jewelers, gold- 
smiths, and silversmiths, it seems likely that the palanquin was made there. 

Sri Yadvcndra Sahai of the Maharaja Sawai Man Singh II Museum graciously pro- 
vided much of the information on Maharaja Ram Singh II and the court of Jaipur. 



In the official catalogue of the lavish exhibition of Indian art held in the 
Kudsia Gardens of Delhi in 1903, Sir George Watt wrote, "Perhaps if any 
one article could be singled out as more freely discussed at the Exhibition 
than any other, it would be the Pearl carpet of Baroda." He explains that the 
exhibition contained two parts of what must have been a dazzling ensemble, 
the circular portion (not included here), which he described as a "veil or 
canopy," and "the rectangular carpet . . . one of the four such pieces that are 
said to have formed the carpet. . . . The entire series is believed to have cost 
Rs. 60,000,000. His Highness the Gaekwar is permitting these wonderful 
exhibits to be taken to Delhi. The field is seed pearls, the arabesque designs 
in blue and red being worked out in English glass beads with medallions and 
rosettes of diamonds, rubies, emeralds, freely dispersed." To his descrip- 
tion, Watt added an account of 1879 written by Sir George Bird wood in his 
Industrial Arts of India: " 'The most wonderful piece of embroidery ever known 
was the chaddar or veil made by order of Kande Rao, the late Gaekwar of 
Baroda, for the tomb of Mahommed at Medina. It was composed entirely 
of inwrought pearls and precious stones, disposed in an arabesque pattern, 
and is said to have cost a crore (ten millions) of rupees. Although the richest 
stones were worked into it, the effect was almost harmonious. When spread 
out in the sun it seemed suffused with a general iridescent pearly bloom, as 
grateful to the eyes as were the exquisite forms of its arabesques. ' . . . Needless 
to add," Watt continued, "this superb gift never went to Mecca." 1 

The patron of these astonishing objects, Khande Rao, the Gaekwar of 
Baroda (r. 1856-70), a transitional figure in post-Mutiny British India, more 
than anyone else set the pattern for extravagance associated ever since with 
maharajas. His enthusiasm for splendor brought British disapproval. "A spend- 
thrift, careless of his people, a lover of luxury and pomp," he was called 
by Colonel G. B. Malleson, writing in the days before the Raj encouraged 
princely lavishness. 2 

During the early eighteenth century, the Gaekwars were officers of the 
powerful Maratha Dhabari family, centered in Baroda. Their rise to power 
occurred in mid-century, when Damaji Gaekwar and his uncle Madhaji suc- 



289. 

THE BARODA CARPET 

Gujarat, Baroda, ca. 1865 

Pearls, rubies, emeralds, diamonds, and glass 

beads sewed on deerskin and silk, 

5 ft. 7Y 4 in. x 8 ft. 7Vh in. (1.72 x 2.62 m.) 

Seethadevi Holding 



cessfully wrenched Baroda and the rest of the thriving state of Gujarat from 
the Mughals, who never regained it. 

In 1862, the Gaekwar was officially addressed by the British as His 
Highness the Maharaja Gaekwar of Baroda. And by the time the carpet had 
been commissioned, he had identified his own cause with that of the British 
government. An attempt was made on his life by his younger brother, Mulhar 
Rao, who tried to poison him with a concoction of crushed diamonds. But 
Khande Rao survived; indeed, he flourished — somewhat to the dismay of 
his British overlords. In The Rulers of Baroda, F. A. H. Elliot wrote, "The 
economical spirit of the British period . . . would not admit of any extrava- 
gance. But [Khande Rao and Mulhar Rao] found themselves in a position to 
spend much money, and a great deal of it went towards enriching Brahmans, 
an easy method of acquiring a certain kind of fame. It is more difficult to 
explain, what undoubtedly occurred, how [Khande Rao] extended his chari- 
ties to the Mussalmans, though we may not be far wrong in imagining that 
there was some domestic influence at work." 3 Despite Elliot's attempt to 
raise our eyebrows, it was entirely appropriate for the maharaja of Baroda, 
whose people included many Muslims, to include them on his list of chari- 
ties. If the English critic's views were inspired, as we suspect, by the notori- 
ous lavishness of the present carpet, it is now time to reevaluate the Gaekwar's 
motives, and not only to respect his intentions but also to admire the mas- 
terful work of the jewelers of Gujarat who prepared this generous and re- 
spectful gift in honor of the Muslim community. However unbridled the 
opulence of its million pearls of excellent quality, of its fine diamonds, ru- 
bies, and emeralds beyond count, the design is suitably restrained and dignified, 
a classic arabesque descended from the Mughal tradition and probably in- 
spired by the legendary jeweled covering ordered by Shah Jahan to adorn 
the cenotaph of Mumtaz-Mahal in the Taj Mahal. If one approaches with an 
eye only for worldly delight, or even amusement, one soon backs off, sens- 
ing a degree of underlying seriousness and religious devotion. 

1. Watt, Indian Art, p. 444. 

2. Malleson, An Historical Sketch, p. 251. 

3. Elliot, The Rulers of Baroda, p. 329. 



In the decades after Mughal power had weakened and before British influ- 
ence was much felt in Rajasthan, painting at the courts regained intense 
Rajput character. This heroic portrayal of Maharaja Thakhat Singh of Marwar 
(r. 1843-73) galloping on camelback through the desert with an assortment 
of his women is a confident reassertion of traditional Rajput ways. As the 
inheritor of Maharaja Ram Singh's ateliers (see no. 288), Thakhat Singh 
encouraged his artists to yet bolder and more zestful pictorial experiments. 
Although one might miss the subtleties of characterization associated with 
earlier painting at Jodhpur, when artists and patrons looked to Mughal 
example, the swashing rhythms, audaciously balanced colors, and Rajput 
panache are delightful. 

Thakhat Singh's long rule was problematic to the British. On the one 
hand, he had "done good service" during the Mutiny; on the other, he was 
considered avaricious, careless of affairs, and inaccessible. When Lord Mayo, 
viceroy from 1869 to 1872, held a darbar at Ajmer in 1871, and Thakhat 
Singh was told that the maharana of Udaipur would take precedence over 
him, he refused at the last moment to attend, even though the political agent 
and his own son explained that the question had long since been settled. 
After the darbar, the viceroy directed Thakhat Singh to leave the camp at 
Ajmer one hour before daybreak and diminished his salute by two guns. 

Thakhat Singh was considered "incorrigible." His behavior was at 
odds with Victorian gentlemanliness and a way of life the British deemed 
essential to the pursuit of happiness in India. What might be called the Pax 
Britannica encouraged the Indian aristocracy to cultivate apparently secure 
existences, lived out in slow motion. Supported by their lands and revenues, 
India's major or minor nobilities enjoyed tranquillity, provided they con- 



438 



290. 

MAHARAJA THAKHAT SINGH OF 
MARWAR RIDING WITH HIS 
COURTESANS 

Rajasthan, Marwar, mid-1 9th century 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Miniature: 23% x 37 in. (60.6 x 94 cm.) 
Mehrangarh Museum Trust, Jodhpur, on loan 
from Maharaja Sri Gaj Singhji II of Jodhpur 




formed to the code of the Raj. Rebels, misfits, and those with troublesome 
(as opposed to harmlessly picturesque) eccentricities were delicately isolated, 
or crushed. What were the requirements? Willingness to follow a gentle- 
manly pattern, not to rock the ship of state, and to pay taxes. Charm, of 
course, was appreciated, and public spending even more so. Eyebrows were 
raised — and salutes, perhaps, lowered — if a prince did not encourage the 
economy by employing British architects, designers, and decorators to build 
palaces, guest houses, hospitals, schools, and parks and then outfit them 
with the best English goods. Indians of other classes, it was assumed, benefited 
from their largess. 

For the diffusion of these views, public schools were founded in India 
to educate young Rajputs as almost-English gentlemen— and to discourage 
the princes from adhering too rigidly to traditional ways. Chiefs College 
Rajputana (also known as Mayo College) was a Rajput Eton staffed by Eng- 
lish schoolmasters, whose grand students arrived with courtiers and 
attendants, as well as horses, polo ponies, and other royal essentials, and 
were housed in suitably palatial quarters. The princes studied British history 
and tales of colonial heroism, Shakespeare, Kahdasa, and the Lake Poets, 
and they were given some science, enough mathematics to tot up revenues] 
and lessons in deportment, cricket, and art. Youths taught to appreciate 
Landseer's tearful evocations of hunts in the highlands must soon have found 
pictures such as this one of Maharaja Thakhat Singh and his courtesans on 
the plains rather old-fashioned. 



439 



291 



291. 

FOUR REDDI RAJAS AT COURT 
Probably by Garudadri Appaya 
Deccan, Hyderabad, ca. 1875 
Opaque watercolor on paper 
Folio: 14 3 / 4 x \m in. (37.6 x 34.9 cm.) 
Miniature: UVh X 12Y* in. (35.8 X 32.5 cm.) 
Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian 
Art, Hyderabad (76.419) 



At the time this rather large group portrait was painted at Hyderabad, 
much Indian sculpture and painting was being done in the Company style, 
and the art schools established some decades earlier at Bombay, Calcutta, 
and Madras were fast spreading the influence of European painting. By the 
1880s, European fashions had infiltrated court life even at Hyderabad, where 
the nizams of the Asaf Jahi dynasty who had ruled the state since 1724 had 
adhered staunchly to their old ways and customs. Painting at Hyderabad as 
yet showed no signs of the intrusive influence of the Company style, but 
photographers had already been welcomed at court. Mahbub c Ali Khan, 
who during his reign at Hyderabad from 1866 to 1911 kept the most exotic 
and lavish court in India, appointed Lala Din Dayal court photographer in 
1884 (see no. 296). 

The Reddi rajas were Hindu agriculturists. Over the course of time a 
number of them had become landlords, and under the nizams some of them 
controlled sizable states and would have paid occasional visits to the capital. 
The raja who commissioned this portrayal of four Reddis at court, sur- 
rounded by their courtiers and attendants, was perhaps a traditionalist who 
preferred a scene imbued with the decorative charm only an Indian minia- 
ture painter's brush could give to a faithful but colorless photographic record. 
For despite the European sofa and chair and the glass lamps, and though its 
appeal is somewhat marred by the garish green and blue pigments and aniline 
dyes — European imports that were a common feature of post-1830 Indian 
paintings — this picture displays many of the refined, reserved, and gentle 
traits of earlier paintings from Hyderabad. 

The miniature may be the work of Garudadri Appaya, who seems to 
have belonged to a family of painters from Shorapur, a state in the nizams' 
dominions that was ruled by Hindu rajas. The same fine brushwork and 
meticulous workmanship are found in other paintings by Shorapur artists. 



J.M. 



To understand and appreciate the ample lady of this miniature, one need 
only look beyond the earmarks of time — the flowers, tassels, book, and 
chair— to recognize an Indian archetype: the forceful senior wife who pro- 
tects traditional values as well as the family coffers. Stable and staunch, 
self-possessed, benevolent but firm, she is well known to everyone who has 
lived in India. We meet her here in Victorian guise, but she is better known 
from a famous sculpture of the first century B.C. that was found at Besnagar 
and is now in the Indian Museum of Calcutta. 1 The ancient likeness shows 
the same almost physical intelligence and has the same rounded forms, be- 
speaking fertility. She is draped in comparably contour hugging, rhythmi- 
cally arranged clothing and wears remarkably similar jewelry, down to the 
last ankle bracelet and toe ring. 



292. 

A RATHOR PRINCESS 

Inscribed: "auspicious one . . . Rathor . . . 

Sri Rastan . . . princess" 

Rajasthan, mid-19th century 

Opaque watercolor on paper, 25V4 X lS'/a in. 

(64 x 47 cm.) 

Private collection 



1. See: Codrington and Rothenstein, Ancient India, pi. oa. 



293. 

A PARSI GIRL 

Bombay, ca. 1875 

Ivory, height 5 5 /h in. (14.4 cm.) 

Trustees of the Prince of Wales Museum of 

Western India, Bombay (31.92) 



Among the least Indian of Indians, the Parsis, whose name derives from 
"farsi," or "Persian," are Zoroastrians who fled from Muslim persecution and 
emigrated to western India (first to Surat and later Bombay) at the time of 
the Arab invasions of Iran in the eighth century. Remaining to itself, the 
small community of Parsis in India (there are fewer than 100,000 in India 
today) has prospered ever since in mercantile and professional life. Their 
reliable efficiency and quickness appealed to the British, who sought their 
services, especially as ship chandlers, during the late eighteenth century, and 
also helped them gain positions as administrators and finance ministers at 
Rajput and nawabi courts. 

Close contact with the British introduced the Parsis to international 
trade — and tastes. Chinoiserie as well as Europeenerie enriched Parsi 
households, one of which contained this finely carved portrait of a daughter 
of the family wearing her paijama. 





293, detail 



294. 

TANSI THAKUR BAG SINGH AND HIS 
COURT 

Attributed to S. Ram Narayan 
Rajasthan, dated 1880 
Opaque watercolor on paper, 40 X 32 1 /? in. 
(101.6x82.6 cm.) 

Collection Prince Sadruddin Aga Khan, Geneva 



One smiles with pleasure — and holds one's ears. Tansi Thakur Bag Singh, 
who ruled a small fiefdom somewhere between Jaipur and Udaipur, has 
overgenerously provided his guests with three musical entertainments. Two 
perform simultaneously: an English style drum-and-bugle corps in fancy 
dress at bottom right, and a troupe of home-grown musicians to whose tune 
the nautch girls spin on the red carpet. A woman seated beside her stringed 
instrument is shown at center right. In 1880, a thakur's life was not without 
amenities, and this picture brings together more than a three-ring circus of 
them. Accompanied by his son, Kunwar Gopal Singh, and his secretary, 
Khiali Ahmed, Tansi Thakur Bag Singh, comfortably dressed in kurta and 



442 




294 



paijama and seated at ease on the throne, oversees his full darbar. The court 
is framed with a rhythmic arrangement of English gaslights, stallions and 
duck ponds, the thakur's pigeons and other birds, his artillery (firing salutes), 
a "Ferris wheel," a swing, a merry-go-round, and five gymnasts (in fact 
soldiers who have removed their shoes, solar topis, and outer garments). All 
this and more was composed and arranged with military precision against a 
stunning ground of striped dhurries by the talented and diligent Ram Narayan. 
Every significant figure here — from the thakur to his dancing girls, guards, 
and servants — has been portrayed in depth, apparently from photographic 
likenesses. 

By 1880, painters were losing out to photographers at courts in India — if 
they had not already taken to the new art themselves in a scramble for 
patronage. To compete, painters had explored all avenues, from making 
painted copies of photographs, to painting over them, to, as here, adding 
portraits in photographic style to traditional compositions. Some artists be- 
came sign painters (their successors have participated in the recent artistic 
crescendo of film billboards); others, to make ends meet, designed colored 
lithographs of gods, goddesses, and worldly notables, or adorned the walls 
of rich merchants' mansions, or at wedding times enlivened buildings and 
courtyards with depictions of bridegrooms riding horses or elephants. 
Inasmuch as Ram Narayan achieved the best of both worlds, we assume that 
he prospered. 

Published: Octagon, p. 19. 



Coming upon this lyrical coat, nostalgic as dried flowers in a book ot verse, 
brings to mind some beguiling child taking the air with his ayah and bearer. 
Was he a princeling, the son of a rich merchant, or a toddling British 
administrator-to-be? By 1890 or 1900, Indian society had so changed that 
"royal" costumery was no longer limited to royalty. The spring-fresh cloth, 
a courtly flower garden that survived the defoliation of the Mughal empire, 
has leaves reminiscent of those in Jahangir's Squirrels in a Plane Tree (no. 
141). Although the coat is tailored in late nineteenth-century style, the fab- 
ric was probably woven earlier, in the late eighteenth or early nineteenth 
century, by the same Kashmiri families who had spun, dyed, designed, and 
woven textiles for the emperors. Inscribed textiles of comparable design and 
technique were also made in Amritsar by Kashmiri craftsmen. 



295. 

CHILD'S COAT 

Probably Amritsar, 19th century 

Wool, length 28% in. (72.7 cm.) 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, 

The Nasli Heeramaneck Collection, Gift of 

Alice Heeramaneck (1983.494.10) 



Photography was brought to India in the 1840s, and by 1890 it was a 
well-established professional and amateur activity, practiced by both foreign- 
ers and Indians. By 1849, F. Schranzhofer had opened India's first photo- 
graphic studio; the Photographic Society of Bombay was founded in 1855; 
and the following year, the East India Company hired photographers in- 
stead of draftsmen. Soon ambitious lensmen were lugging awkward and 
heavy equipment to India's farthest reaches. Firms such as Bourne & Shep- 
herd and Johnston & Hoffman offered superb prints of landscapes, archaeo- 
logical monuments, animals, and people to an eager public. 

Lala Din Dayal was the first major professional Indian photographer. 
Born at Sardhana in 1844, he studied at Thompson's Civil Engineering Col- 
lege in Roorkee, then was employed by the Public Works Department of 
Indore. In 1874, encouraged by Sir Henry Daly, who must have noted in 
him the rare combination of technician and artist, he began to study photog- 
raphy as an amateur. Maharaja Tukoji Rao II of Indore subsidized his early 
photographic work, which included portraits of the viceroy and of the Prince 
of Wales (later King Edward VII) when he visited India in 1875-76. The 
portraits were so admired that Din Dayal was asked to photograph the Eng- 
lish darbars at Simla, the hill station to which the viceroy and his entou- 
rage moved during the hot months. 

In 1884, Lala Din Dayal was appointed court photographer to H.H. Sir 
Mahbub c Ali Khan, the sixth nizam of Hyderabad, who also gave him a fine 
house and a splendid title: Raja Musavvir Jung (Photographer Warrior). He 
was also the only photographer in India entitled to follow his name with 
"By Appointment, Photographer to Her Imperial Majesty, Queen Victoria. " 
Talented as a businessman as well, he had ateliers at Indore and Hyderabad, 
and in 1896 he opened the largest photographic studios in Bombay. In 
Secunderabad, Raja Din Dayal and Sons enterprisingly established a special 
Zenana Studio for Female Photography, which was headed by Mrs. Kenny- 
Levick, wife of a London Times correspondent. Lala Din Dayal died in 1910, 
a year before his major patron, the nizam. 

Lala Din Dayal's work is wide-ranging. His portraits far transcend the 
fashionable and documentary; his architectural and archaeological studies 
not only catch moods but are technically flawless, always sharply focused 
and undistorted by wall-toppling problems of parallax, and his panoramic 
compositions of elephants, tents, the nizam's armies, and cavalcades of distin- 
guished visitors in carriages are of picturesque grandeur. 

Photographic portraits, recorded point-blank by lenses, not filtered 
through painters' eyes and minds, can be magically closer to their subjects 
than paintings — provided the photographer is not only skillful but sensitive 
and concerned. Lala Din Dayal was one of the few photographers able to 
meet those conditions. In about 1890 he posed this alert, fawnlike princeling, 
talwar in hand, against a staged Tudoresque backdrop. This portrait of a 
pensive child, whose hauntingly mysterious intelligence outshines all the 
finery, stands apart from the era when maharajas were in fullest swing and 
most photographers concentrated not on the sitter's character but on the 



296. 

TWO PHOTOGRAPHS 
By Lala Din Dayal 
Deccan, Hyderabad, ca. 1890 
Private collection 

a. A YOUNG PRINCE 

\0Yh x JVh m. (26.4X20 cm.) 

b. TWO PAIRS OF SWAGGED CURTAINS 

UViXWhiu. (29.2x23.2 cm.) 



445 




296 a 



uninhibited royal flair for splendid jewels and raiment — costumes that would 
have stunned fin-de-siecle Paris or London. The prince's identity is unknown. 
At the studio of Din Dayal's successors, Mrs. Subas Chand very generously 
showed us the original ledgers. Though virtually all other photographs of 
the same numerical sequence are recorded, with their provenances and the 
names of the sitters, this one is unidentified, and the glass negative no longer 
exists. 



446 



2%b 



The pairs of swagged curtains, probably the least "important" of Din 
Dayal's images, are nevertheless artistically and nostalgically potent. Clogged, 
bunched, and surrealistically mounted, not around a door or windows but 
against an impenetrable wall, the hangings pique the imagination. Heavy 
tassels, fraying European stuffs, and staccato shadows writhe with the ache 
of East meeting West. 



CHRONOLOGY 
GLOSSARY 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
INDEX 

PHOTOGRAPH CREDITS 



<289, detail 



CHRONOLOGY 

compiled by Norbert Peabody and Woodman Taylor 



The time frame for this exhibition begins in the thirteenth cen- 
tury, as the great dynasties of India's classical age are coming to an 
end: the Pandyas and Hoysalas of South India give way to the 
Vijayanagar kingdom; the Senas of Bengal arc defeated by the 
Ghorids, as are the Chandellas in North Central India and the 
Chauhans in Rajasthan. The Great Tradition section of the exhi- 
bition derives its inspiration from this classical age, rooted in an- 
cient Indian traditions. Similarly, the Tribe and Village section 
includes objects that are timeless, the reflection of customs which 
continue even today. The Muslim presence in India, beginning in 
the twelfth century, shapes Sultanate, Mughal, and Deccani art, 
but not without the influence of local traditions. The Rajputs of 
Rajasthan and the Punjab Hills, though adapting Mughal court 
culture, strongly retain their Hindu character. With the era of Brit- 
ish rule, another foreign culture interacts with the fertile Indian 
environment. 



973-1048 Al-Biruni, the great Muslim intellectual from the 
court of Mahmud of Ghazni, after thirteen years 
of travel in northern India describes Indian ge- 
ography, philosophy, religion, and science in his 
detailed Arabic work Kitab al-Hind. 

1106-67 Basavanna establishes the Virashaiva sect, later 
known as the Lingayats, which is devoted to the 
worship of the Hindu god Shiva through the ded- 
ication of one's body as his temple. 

1193 Muhammad of Ghor takes control of Delhi. His 
former slave Qutb ad-Din Aibek establishes in 
1206 the first Muslim sultanate in India. Dur- 
ing this period, the expansive Quwwat al-Islam 
Mosque (fig. 2) and the monumental Qutb Minar 
are built. 

1142-1235 Mu c in ad-Din Chishti brings the teachings of his 
Sufi tradition to India, founding a chain of suc- 
cession that continues to this day. His tomb at 
Ajmer is a center of pilgrimage, especially on the 
anniversary of his death. 

1253-1325 Amir Khusrau Dihlavi, court poet of seven kings 
in Delhi, is well known for his Persian lyrical po- 
etry, his epical Khamsa (Quintet), and poetical de- 
scriptions of contemporary events. He is also 
reputed to have invented the musical instruments 
the sitar and the tabla, as well as the musical forms 
of qawwali and tarana. 

1327 Muhammad Tughluq moves his capital from Delhi 
to Deogiri in the Deccan, renaming it Daulatabad, 
where he builds an impressive citadel (fig. 3). 

1336 The kingdom of Vijayanagar, the successor of the 
great South Indian dynasties (fig. 1), is founded 
by two brothers, Hanhara and Bukka. Their cap- 
ital is renowned for its wealth and architectural 
grandeur. 

1341 Muhammad ibn Badr Jajarmi composes the Mifnis 
al-Ahrar, which is illustrated in the same year. 




Fig. 1. Vitthala Temple, Vijayanagar, begun in 1513. Photograph by 
E. I). Lyon, 1860s. Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal 



1345 Hasan Gangu, the Tughluq governor of the 
Deccan, rebels to found the Bahmanid kingdom, 
with its capital at Gulbarga. 

1345-58 Shams ad-Din Ilyas Shah proclaims an indepen- 
dent sultanate in Bengal with its capital at Gaur. 

1347-58 Abu'l Muzaffar c Ala ad-Din Bahman expands 
the Bahmanid state to include the provinces of 
Gulbarga, Daulatabad, Berar, and Bidar. 

1352 Ibn Battuta, the North African geographer, de- 
scribes his extensive Indian travels in his Arabic 
Rihla. 

1377-78 Mulla Da'ud composes the Chandayana, the love 
story of Laur and Chanda, in Hindi. It is illus- 
trated in the sixteenth century. 

1398 Timur (Tamerlane) invades northwestern India. 



Fig. 2. Quwwat-al Islam Mosque, Delhi, begun in 1192. Photograph 
by Samuel Bourne, 1860s. Fogg Art Museum, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



Fig. 3. Fortress, Daulatabad, begun in 1327. Unidentified photographer, 
19th century. Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal 



1401 Dilavar Khan Ghori establishes the independent 
state of Malwa, with its capital at Mandu, in 
Central India. 

1411-42 The reign in Gujarat of Ahmad Shah, who founds 
the city of Ahmedabad and builds many of its 
monuments. 

1420-70 Zain al- c Abidin Badshah, an enlightened patron 
of scholarship, art, and architecture, rules Kashmir 
from Srinagar. 

ca. 1440-1518 The mystic and poet Kabir opposes religious sec- 
tarianism and teaches the unity of Hindu and 
Muslim under one God. 

1458-1511 Mahmud Begra, the famed Prince of Cambay, 
rules Gujarat, captures Champanir, and builds a 
large palace complex at Sarkhej. 

1459 Rao Jodha, Rajput maharaja of Marwar, builds 
an impressive fortified capital at Jodhpur. 

1469-1538 Guru Nanak, after a long religious quest through 
many religions, founds the Sikh religion. 

1472 The great madrasa of the Iranian-born Mahmud 
Gawan is founded in Bidar, capital of the Bah- 
manids since 1422, to attract scholars from all parts 
of the Islamic world. The tiled facade and four- 
iwan construction are reminiscent of Persian ar- 
chitecture from the same period. 

1484-1512 The Bahmanid kingdom fragments into five in- 
dependent sultanates, all with related styles of 
painting and architecture: the c Imad Shahi sul- 
tanate of Berar (1484-1574); the c Adil-Shahi sul- 
tanate of Bijapur (1489-1686); the Nizam-Shahi 
sultanate of Ahmadnagar (1490-1636); the Barid- 
Shahi sultanate of Bidar (1492-1609); and the 
Qutb-Shahi sultanate of Golconda (1512-1687). 

1485 Birth in Bengal of Chaitanya, leader in the bhakti 
movement, who founds a sect devoted to the lov- 
ing worship of Krishna. 

1486-1516 Raja Man Singh builds his palace at Gwalior, com- 
bining Hindu and Muslim architectural elements. 

1498 Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama reaches Cal- 
icut by sea, thereby opening new trade routes for 
European merchants. 



1500-1511 Nasir ad-Din Khalji, sultan of Mandu, continues 
his father's patronage of literature and painting, 
including the composition of the Ni c mat-nama and 
its illustration by Haji Mahmud. 

1501 Bihari Lai, Hindi poet at the Jaipur court, com- 
poses his Sat Sai, later illustrated by many paint- 
ers in the Punjab Hill courts. 

1503 Sultan Sikandar Lodi transfers his capital from 
Delhi to Agra, a city that is to achieve architec- 
tural glory in the Mughal period. 

1503-4 Hindi poet Shaikh Qutban composes the Mrigavata, 
soon illustrated. 

1504 Babur, from the house of Timur, occupies Kabul, 
where his son and successor Humayun is born 
four years later. 

1509-30 Krishnadeva Raya rules Vijayanagar, is patron of 
eight major Telegu poets, and builds the great 
Krishnaswami Temple at his capital. 

1510 Affonso d'Albuquerque wrests the island of Goa 
from the sultan of Bijapur, making Portugal the 
first European colonizer of India. 

1526 Babur defeats Ibrahim Lodi at Panipat and founds 
the great Mughal empire in India. 

1530-56 Humayun, at the age of twenty-two, succeeds 
his father Babur as Mughal emperor and reigns 
for twenty-six years. 

1532-1623 Tulsidas, a leading poet of the Hindu bhakti move- 
ment, composes a popular version of the epic 
Ramayana in Hindi, the Ramcharitmanas . 

1540 Sher Shah Sur defeats Humayun at Kanauj and 
takes over the capital at Delhi. Humayun escapes 
to Sind, where his son Akbar is born in 1542. 

1540-50 The Uzbek sultan c Abd al- c Aziz of Bukhara com- 
missions a manuscript of the poet Sa c di's Bustan, 
copied by thecalligrapher Mir- c Ali al-Husaini with 
three paintings by Shaikh-Zada. This masterpiece 
is later bought by the Mughal emperor Jahangir, 
whose painter Bishndas repaints some of the 
miniatures. 

1544 Humayun resides at the Safavid court of Shah 
Tahmasp, where he observes the leading Iranian 
artists at work. 



1548-63 Surdas, a blind poet and a disciple of Vallabhachar- 
ya, composes the Sur-Sagar in praise of Krishna, 
a text that gains popularity and is often copied 
and illustrated. 

1550 Humayun establishes his court at Kabul. One of 
the artists in his atelier is Dust-Muhammad. 

1555 Humayun, defeating Sikandar Shah Suri at Sir- 
hind, returns to India accompanied by the lead- 
ing Safavid artists, Mir Sayyid c Ali and c Abd 
as-Samad. 

Baz Bahadur declares his independence as sultan 
of Mandu. His love for Rupmati, a courtesan, is 
the subject of painting and poetry in both folk 
and court traditions. 

1556 After falling from his library steps, Humayun dies. 
His son Akbar, at the age of fourteen, succeeds 
him. 

1556-1605 During the reign of Akbar, the Mughal empire 
expands to include most of India. Akbar's con- 
quests include Malwa (Central India) in 1552, 
Chittor (Rajasthan) in 1568, Ranthambor and 
Kalanjar (Rajasthan) in 1569, Gujarat in 1573, Ben- 
gal in 1576, Kashmir in 1586, Sind in 1591, Orissa 
in 1592, Baluchistan and Makran in 1594, Kanda- 
har in 1595, and Berar, Khandcsh, and part of 
Ahmadnagar from 1595 to 1601. Akbar's interest 
in other religions leads him to commission the 
translation and illustration of Hindu epics such as 
the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. 



1557-1605 Akbar's artists undertake to illustrate the Dastan-i 
Amir Hamza, which comprises 1,400 large-format 
paintings in twelve unsewn volumes. 

1565 A confederacy of Deccani sultans defeats Vijayana- 
gar at the Battle of Talikota. Wadiyar Vira Chama 
Raja creates the state of Mysore from one of the 
areas not overrun. 

1569 The monumental tomb of Humayun (fig. 4) is 
constructed in Delhi from red sandstone and 
marble. 

1570-1600 Akbar's artist Basawan works on paintings for 
the Tuti-nama, the Hamza-nama, the Darab-nama, 
the Anvar-i Suhaili, and the Divan-i Anvari. 

1571-85 Akbar builds an extensive capital at Fatehpur-Sikri 
(fig. 5), near Agra, centered on the tomb of the 
Sufi saint Salim Chishti. 

1574 On a site given by Akbar, the Sikh Guru Ram Das 
builds the Hari Mandir in Amritsar. 

1579 The Din-i Ilahi, an eclectic religious sect, is founded 
by Akbar, who professes universal toleration. 

1579-1626 The reign of Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II at Bijapur, 
during which art, music, and poetry flourish. The 
Kitab-i Nauras, a book of songs, is composed by 
Ibrahim himself (fig. 6). 

1580 Akbar builds an ornate palace, later known as the 
Jahangiri Mahal, in the Red Fort at Agra. 



Fig. 4. Tomb of Humayun, Delhi, begun in 1565. Unidentified 
photographer, 19th century. Collection Paul F. Walter, New York 



1589 Akbar has Babur's autobiography, the Babur-nama, 
translated from Chaghatai Turkish into Persian 
and illustrated by his best court artists. 

1590 Muhammad-Quli Qutb-Shah, a great builder and 
patron of poetry and the arts, founds Hyderabad 
and transfers his capital from Golconda. 

1591 One of the earliest sets of Ragamala paintings, 
depicting musical modes, is executed at Chunar, 
possibly for a Rajasthani patron. 

1596 The Akbar-nama, a chronicle of Akbar's reign, is 
composed by the court chronicler and poet Abu 3 l- 
Fazl and illustrated by the leading artists of the 
atelier. Abu 3 l-Fazl also writes the A^in-i Akbari 
and is an adviser and confidant of the emperor's. 

1598 Basohli, the Punjab Hill state that later becomes 
known for its distinctive style of painting, is 
founded by Raja Bhupat Pal. 

1600 Queen Elizabeth grants a charter to the East India 
Company authorizing it to conduct trade with 
India and the Far East. 

1603 Shah c Abbas of Iran sends an ambassador to 
Golconda. Cultural and political ties between the 
Deccan and Iran remain strong. 

1604 Guru Arjun compiles the Adi Granth, the sacred 
book of the Sikhs. 

1605 At Akbar's death, Jahangir assumes the throne. 
Artists in his workshop include Miskin, Basawan, 
Balchand, Daulat, Murad, Govardhan, Bichitr, 
Abu 3 l-Hasan, Mansur, Farrukh Beg, Aqa Riza, 
Muhammad c Ali, and Manohar. 

1612 Jahangir grants the British rights to set up facto- 
ries at Surat, Ahmedabad, and Cambay. 

1613-20 Jahangir sends an embassy, which includes his art- 
ist Bishndas, to the court of the Safavid ruler 
Shah c Abbas at Isfahan. 

1615 King James I sends Sir Thomas Roe to Jahangir's 
court as his ambassador. 

1622-24 Nur-Jahan builds a tomb in Agra (fig. 7) for her 
father, Itimad ad-Daula, with exquisite jalis and 
pietra dura geometric designs inlaid in the finest 
marble. 

1623 Tirumala Nayaka succeeds Virappa at Madurai, 
where he builds an impressive palace in a combi- 
nation of architectural styles and also makes im- 
portant additions to the great Minakshi Temple. 

1625 Under the leadership of Raja Madhu Singh, Kotah 
becomes independent from the state of Bundi. 

1626- 72 "Abdullah Qutb-Shah, an accomplished poet who 

also maintains a large workshop of painters, rules 
Golconda. 

1627- 58 Shah Jahan succeeds Jahangir and reigns as Mughal 

emperor. Artists in royal workshops include 
Hashim, Chitarman, Govardhan, Bichitr, Payag, 
Balchand, Lalchand, and Murad. 

1631 Mumtaz-Mahal, Shah Jahan's beloved queen, dies 
in Burhanpur while giving birth to her fourteenth 
child. Shah Jahan begins a tomb in tribute to her, 
the Taj Mahal (fig. 8). 

1633 The Mughal army conquers the fortress at Daula- 
tabad, thereby ending the c Imad-Shahi dynasty. 

1635 Shah Jahan inaugurates the Peacock Throne, which 
has taken seven years to construct. 




Fig. 5. Courtyard, Jami c Masjid, Fatehpur-Sikri, 1571-85. Photograph by Samuel 
Bourne, 1860s. Fogg Art Museum, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 




Fig. 6. Ibrahim Rauza, the tomb of Ibrahim c Adil-Shah II, Bijapur, 
ca. 1615. Unidentified photographer, 19th century. Private collection 




Fig. 7. Tomb of Itimad ad-Daula, Agra, 1622-24. Unidentified 
photographer, 19th century. Collection Paul F. Walter, New York 



453 




1635-73 Raja Sangram Singh of Basohli, possibly influ- 
enced by a year spent in the Mughal capital of 
Delhi, is an enthusiastic patron of art in his Hill 
state. 

1640s The Padshah-nama, a record of Jahangir's rule, is 
illustrated by Shah Jahan's leading artists. 

1641 The East India Company sets up factories at 
Madras. 

1648 Shah Jahan moves his capital from Agra to Delhi 
and establishes a new fort and city, called Shah- 
jahanabad (fig. 9). 

Shivaji revolts against Bijapur, takes over the 
North Konkan, and sets up his capital at Kalyan. 

ca.1650 Prince Dara-Shikoh attempts to reconcile Hindu 
and Muslim beliefs in his Majma c al-Bahrain. 

1656 The Gol Gumbaz (fig. 10), mausoleum for Mu- 
hammad c Adil-Shah, is built in Bijapur with a 
dome almost as large as that of Saint Peter's in 
Rome. 

1658-66 Shah Jahan is imprisoned in Agra Fort by Aurang- 
zeb, his third son, who has usurped the throne. 
He dies there. 

1671 The image of Sri Nathji is brought to Nathadwara 
from Mathura. The market for pilgrims' souve- 
nirs and for pechhavais used in temple rituals leads 
to the development in Nathadwara of a center of 
painting. 



1687 The French found a settlement at Pondicherry, 
south of Madras. 

Aurangzeb conquers Golconda, thereby ending 
the rule of the last Deccani sultanate. 

1689 Mughal armies lay siege to the Bijapur fort at 
Adoni, after which Maharaja Anup Singh of 
Bikaner, who served as a Mughal general in the 
campaign, is made governor of the fort. 

1691 Calcutta (fig. 11) is founded by Job Charnock 
and soon becomes the main center of British mer- 
cantile activity in India. 

1695-1763 During the reign of Raja Dalip Singh of Guler a 
series of large paintings illustrating the Hindu epic 
the Ramayana is commissioned. 

1719-34 Maharaja Jai Singh II builds the Jantar Mantar 
observatory in his new capital at Jaipur (fig. 12). 

1719-48 The reign of the ineffectual Muhammad Shah 
witnesses the collapse of the central authority of 
the Mughal empire. 

1724 Asaf Jah Nizam al-Mulk, a Mughal governor of 
the Deccan, declares the independence of Hyder- 
abad. The nizams of Hyderabad rule India's larg- 
est princely state until 1948. 

1724-63 Raja Balwant Singh of Jammu takes pride in his 
court painter Nainsukh, who records his ruler's 
daily activities. 



454 




Fig. 9. Chandni Chowk, the main thoroughfare of Delhi (Shahjahanabad), Fig. 10. Gol Gumbaz, the tomb of Muhammad c Adil-Shah, Bijapur, 

built ca. 1648. Photograph by Samuel Bourne, 1860s. Fogg Art Museum, built ca. 1656. Unidentified photographer, 19th century. Collection 

Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts Howard and Jane Ricketts, London 



1734 A darbar of all Rajputana rulers is held near Ajmer 
in the Jodhpur royal tent. 

1739 The Iranian ruler Nadir Shah invades India and 
sacks Delhi, taking with him the Peacock Throne, 
the Koh-i Nur diamond, and 300 artisans. 

1748-64 Poet and prince Sawant Singh of Kishangarh's 
eccentric activities are spiritedly captured by court 
artist Nihal Chand. 

1757 At the Battle of Plassey, the East India Company 
defeats Nawab Siraj ad-Daula, thereby gaining 
control of Bengal. 

1770-90 While serving in the East India Company, Rich- 
ard Johnson forms a collection of Indian paint- 
ings that he later sells to the Company. 



1775-1823 Through his interest in painting, Raja Sansar 
Chand makes Kangra a flourishing center of Pun- 
jab Hill painting. The Hindu texts of the Gita 
Govinda, the Rasikapriya, the Sat Sai, the Rama- 
yana, the Mahabharata, and the Bhagavata Purana 
are lavishly illustrated by his court artists. 

1777-83 Lady Impey, wife of Chief Justice Sir Elijah Impey, 
employs three painters from Patna, Shaikh Zain 
ad-Din, Bhawani Das, and Ram Das, to paint 
Indian flora and fauna and also to record the ac- 
tivities of her family (see no. 281). 

1780-1839 Maharaja Ranjit Singh rules the Punjab with the 
help of European mercenaries such as Jean- 
Francois Allard(see no. 278). 




Fig. 11. View across the esplanade, Calcutta. Photograph by Samuel Bourne, 
1860s. Fogg Art Museum, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 



455 



1784 Sir William Jones founds the Asiatic Society of 
Bengal to promote and publish research in the 
history, arts, sciences, and literature of India. 

1795-1808 Thomas and William Daniell publish Oriental Scen- 
ery, with 144 aquatints of India made after paint- 
ings and drawings done during many tours there. 
This publication brings India into the parlors of 
many English homes. 

1797-1869 Mirza Asadullah Khan Ghalib, the leading poet 
of northern India, writes poetry in Persian and 
Urdu for such patrons as the last Mughal em- 
peror of Delhi, Bahadur Shah II, and the nawab 
of Rampur. 

1799-1830 William Fraser arrives in India as agent of the 
governor-general. During his tours of duty in 
northwestern India, he employs at least two Indi- 
an artists, most notably Ghulam c Ali Khan, to re- 
cord the village life he encounters (see nos. 49, 50). 

1800 Jaipur maharaja Sawai Pratap Singh convenes a 
conference of leading musicians, the proceedings 
of which are compiled as the Sangit Sar, an im- 
portant Hindi treatise on music. 

1801 The India Museum is established in London with 
the Sanskritist Charles Wilkins as curator. The 
museum, the precursor of the India Office Li- 
brary, is to collect manufactures and natural prod- 
ucts of India and to maintain a library. 

1819 The Ajanta caves, with their outstanding murals 
representing Buddhist lore, are discovered, caus- 
ing a reevaluation of early Indian painting. 

1820-57 Maharaja Gulab Singh rules both Jammu and 
Kashmir. 

1828 Raja Ram Mohan Roy, leader of the Bengal ren- 
aissance, founds the Brahmo Samaj, a form of 
Hinduism influenced by Christianity and Islam. 



1833 The British Parliament takes over the Indian pos- 
sessions of the East India Company. 

1835-37 In the Goomsur Wars, the British try to stop the 
tribal Konds from continuing human sacrifice. 

1837-58 The last Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah II, is 
more concerned with composing poetry and prac- 
ticing calligraphy than with events outside 
his domain of Delhi. 

1841 The first permanent academic position for a pro- 
fessor of Sanskrit and Indology in the United 
States is created at Yale University. A year later, 
the American Oriental Society is founded in New 
Haven. 

1842 Ram Singh II of Kotah (r. 1828-69) visits Bahadur 
Shah II in Delhi, an occasion that is the subject of 
a monumental painting on cloth by his leading 
court artist (no. 285). 

1847 Wajid c Ali Shah succeeds his father, Nasir ad-Daula, 
as king of Oudh, with its capital at Lucknow 
(fig. 13). 

1850-75 Painter Kehar Singh records life in the Punjab 
(see no. 280). 

1855 The Photographic Society of Bombay is formed, 
an indication of the extensive use of photography 
in India. 

1857 The Indian Mutiny, also known as the first war of 
independence, begins with discontent among sol- 
diers in Meerut and quickly spreads throughout 
northern India. In Delhi, Emperor Bahadur Shah 
II declares his independence and is then exiled by 
the British to Rangoon, where he dies in 1862 
"without two meters of my own land for a grave." 

1858 The British Crown assumes direct control of the 
East India Company. 



Fig. 12. City Palace, Jaipur, with the Hawa Mahal at right, built in 18th century. 
Unidentified photographer, 19th century. Canadian Centre for Architecture, Montreal 



456 



Fig. 13. Kaiserbagh Palace, Lucknow, built in 1850s. Photograph by 
Samuel Bourne, 1860s. Fogg Art Museum, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 



Fig. 14. Rashtrapati Bhavan, New Delhi. Designed by Edwin Lutyens as the 
viceregal residence. Completed in 1931. Unidentified photographer, 20th century. 
From A. S. G. Butler, The Architecture of Sir Edwiti Lutyens, London, 1950 



1862 The Archaeological Survey of India is formed, 
with the object of identifying, documenting, re- 
storing, and preserving the many monuments of 
India's past. 

1875 Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan founds the Muhammadan 
Anglo-Oriental College at Aligarh, where Mus- 
lims learn Western sciences and English. In the 
same year Swami Dayananda founds the Arya 
Samaj, a nco-Hindu organization, also dedicated 
to reconciling traditional ways with modern times. 

The India Museum is established in Calcutta to 
house many newly discovered art treasures. 

1877 Queen Victoria is crowned empress of India. 

1884 Lala Din Dayal is appointed court photographer 
to the nizam of Hyderabad. 

1885 The Indian National Congress is founded in 
Bombay. 

1901 Rabindranath Tagore founds Shantiniketan, a 
school where traditional arts of India can be stud- 
ied. Artist Nandalal Bose teaches students there 
to use indigenous techniques in a contemporary 
mode. 

1905 The Prince of Wales Museum is founded in 
Bombay. 

1911 At the Coronation Darbar in Delhi, King George 
V announces that the capital will be transferred 
from Calcutta to Delhi. 

1913-31 Architects Edwin Lutyens and Herbert Baker 
design the capital buildings and develop a plan 
for New Delhi (fig. 14). 

1917 Ananda Coomaraswamy, the renowned art histo- 
rian, joins the Asiatic Department of the Museum 
of Fine Arts in Boston, due to the enthusiasm of 
Denman Ross, who funds the acquisition of the 
first major collection of Indian art in the United 
States. 

1921 Victoria Memorial, a tribute to the grand British 
empress, is completed in Calcutta and includes a 
museum dedicated to the history of the British in 
India. 



1924-33 The pre-Aryan sites of Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa 
are excavated. 

1947 India gains independence. Earl Mountbatten, the 
last viceroy, is charged with the responsibility of 
transferring power. The subcontinent is divided 
politically into India and Pakistan; the eastern part 
of Pakistan becomes Bangladesh in 1971. 



457 



GLOSSARY 



A: Arabic 

H: Hindi 

P: Persian 

Port: Portuguese 

S: Sanskrit 

T: Turkish 



ankus (S) elephant goad 

apsara (S, lit. "essence of the waters") heav- 
enly nymph, one of the seductive female 
dancers of the gods who take on any form 
at will 

ashoka (S) flowering tree sacred to Shiva; 
in the Ramayana, Rama's wife Sita is held 
captive by the demon Ravana in an ashoka 
grove, and Hindu women have thus asso- 
ciated the tree with fidelity and purity 

asura (S) demon in Hindu mythology 

avatar (S, lit. "descent") incarnation of a 
deity, especially Vishnu, who appeared on 
earth in many forms, both animal and 
human 

ayah (H/Porti) nursemaid or lady's maid 

begum (H/T) Muslim princess or lady of 
high rank 

Bhairava (S) the Terrible One, the Hindu 
god Shiva in his destructive aspect; also 
one of the terrifying forms of the Vedic 
god Rudra, the Roarer 

bhakti (S) loving devotion to a deity 

bidri, bidriware (after the Deccani city of 
Bidar) metalware made from an alloy that 
is inlaid with gold or silver, then blackened 

Bihari (after the province of Bihar) Indian 
style of Arabic calligraphy distinguished 
by its wedgelike forms 

Brahma (S, masc. of brahman, lit. "all- 
pervasive power") first god of the Hindu 
trinity, the Creator 

chakdar jama (P, lit. "split garment") four- 
pointed skirt introduced by the Mughals 

chapati (H) flat, round unleavened bread 

charba (P) copy or tracing; also the thin vel- 
lum used for tracing 



charpoi (H/P, lit. "four-legged") simple 
bedstead or cot 

chauri (H) yak-tail fly whisk 

chhatri (H) kiosk with an umbrella-like 
dome 

chhattar (H) umbrella 

chitrakara (S) painter 

chowki (H) platform 

chuna (H) slaked lime; also plaster or stucco 
made of lime used for decoration on 
buildings 

danda (S) staff or rod, a symbol of power, 
also carried to ward off evil spirits 

darbar (P) court, or an official or royal pub- 
lic audience 

darogha (P/T) superintendent 

Dasara (H) Hindu autumn festival, a nine- 
day celebration of the triumph of good 
over evil 

dastarkana (P) large cloth spread on the 
floor 

deva (S, lit. "luminous") god 

Devanagari (S, lit. "divine city writing") 
script used for Sanskrit and Sanskrit-based 
Indian languages, written from left to right 

devi (S) goddess 

Devi or Mahadevi (S) the Great Goddess, 
Shiva's consort, representing cosmic en- 
ergy, or shakti. In her benign form the Devi 
is called Uma (Light), Parvati (Daughter 
of the Mountain), Bhavani (Giver of Ex- 
istence); in her fierce aspect she is Durga 
(the Inaccessible One), Kali (the Black 
One), Chandi (the Cruel One), Bhairavi 
(the Terrible One) 



dharma (S, from dhar, "to hold") in Hindu- 
ism and Buddhism, the unchanging moral 
law; man's ethical and religious duty 

dhoti (H) long loincloth worn by Hindu men 

dhrupad (H) classical style of Hindu vocal 
music 

dhyana (S) meditation, contemplation 
div (P) giant, gigantic demon 

divan (P) collection of poetry (Arabic, 
Persian, Turkish, or Urdu) by a single 
author 

diwan (P) gathering 

diwan-i c am (A/P) hall for public audience 
diwan-i khas (A/P) hall for private audience 

dopatta (H) thin shawl of silk or muslin 
worn by women over the head and shoul- 
ders 

farrashkana (P) workshop or chambers 
where carpets, rugs, and other items for a 
royal household were prepared and/or 
stored 

Fatiha (A) first chapter of the Qur 3 an, a 
seven-line prayer recited very frequently; 
the popular Muslim rituals performed 
when the prayer is recited over food or 
sweets are also called Fatiha 

gadi (H) cushion, especially the cushion on 
the ruler's throne 

gandharva (S) musician of the gods, one of 
the guardians of the heavenly nectar 

Ganesha (S) elephant-headed Hindu deity 
associated with wisdom and good fortune 
who as the Remover of Obstacles is in- 
voked before any undertaking 



458 



Garuda (S) mythical figure — part bird, part 
man — identified with the sun, who is the 
emblem and vehicle of Vishnu; Garuda is 
believed to devour snakes and to be able 
to cure the effects of snakebite 

ghanta (S) bell, one of the many objects used 
in Hindu ritual and one of Shiva's attri- 
butes, symbolizing creation; the tolling of 
a bell, said to contain within it the sounds 
of all instruments, protects against evil and 
harm 

ghazal (A) short poem (in Arabic, Persian, 
Turkish, or Urdu), a monorhyme, writ- 
ten in one of the classical Arabo-Persian 
meters, whose main topic is love, divine 
or human 

gopala (S) cowherd 

Gopala or Govinda (S) the Cowherd, an 
epithet of the god Krishna, who grew up 
among the herdsmen and -women of 
Vrindavan 

gopi (S) herdswoman; the gopis — symbols 
of human souls yearning for and enjoy- 
ing union with God — fell in love with 
Krishna, and each of them believed she 
alone was his beloved 

guru (S) teacher, especially of Vedic lore, 
and spiritual master to whom absolute 
obedience is due; also a title of the found- 
ers of Sikhism 

Hadith (A) compendia of the sayings and 
traditions (hadiths) of the Prophet Mu- 
hammad, which were carefully sifted and 
collected in the late ninth century and are 
the basis for Muslim life 

hakim (A) ruler, wise man, or philosopher, 
especially a physician who practices the 
system of Yunani, or "Greek," medicine 

hammam (A) bathhouse 

hamsa (S) goose (often translated as 
"swan"); in Hindu mythology the wild 
goose, a symbol of knowledge, said to teed 
on pearls, is the vehicle of Brahma: its 
graceful flight is akin to man's striving to 
achieve union with the divine 

Hanuman (S, lit. "heavy jawed") resource- 
ful monkey god, counselor to Sugriva the 
monkey king, who in the Ramayana helps 
Rama defeat the demon king of Lanka. 
Hanuman, son of the wind, possesses great 
knowledge and magical powers, and his 
image presides over nearly every village 
or town in northern India 

harem (A) women's quarters, to which only 
the closest male relatives have access 

haveli (H) large house, mansion 

hijra (A, lit. "emigration") the Muslim cal- 
endar (a lunar calendar with years of 354 
days), which begins with 622, the year of 
the emigration (hijra) of the Prophet Mu- 
hammad from his home town of Mecca 
to Yathrib, hence known as Medina (the 
City) 



Holi (H) popular Hindu festival marking 
the coming of spring, during which the 
rejoicing participants throw red or yellow 
powder and liquids at each other 

howdah (H) litter used on camels and 
elephants 

huqqa (A, lit. "box") water pipe 1 ,; also called 
a hubble-bubble 

jali (A, lit. "open") stone or marble open- 
work used in screens 

jama (P) garment or dress, specifically an 
overgarment 

jami c masjid (A, from jami c , "gathering" 
and masjid, "place for prostration") con- 
gregational mosque where Muslims gather 
to pray, especially on Friday, when the ser- 
mon includes recitations of prayers for the 
ruler of the age 

jauhar (H) rite of self-immolation, per- 
formed by Rajputs after a defeat 

jharoka (H) window at which a ruler ap- 
pears to be viewed by his subjects 

jinn (A) spirit, which may be good, evil, 
or neutral, that is created from fire and 
has supernatural powers 

Ka c ba (A, lit. "cube") central sanctuary of 
Islam in Mecca, which all Muslims face 
during the ritual prayer; the black stone 
in its southeastern corner is circumambu- 
lated during the annual pilgrimage to 
Mecca in the last month of the lunar year 

Kaithi (H) Indian style of script associated 
mainly with eastern Uttar Pradesh 

kalamkari (P, lit. "penwork") fine arabesque 
and floral designs on textiles, created with 
hand-applied mordants 

kard (P) Persian dagger with a straight blade 
and hilt 

karkana (P) workshop 

karma (S) in Hinduism, Buddhism, and 
Jainism, the law of cause and effect, ac- 
cording to which every action bears con- 
sequences either in this life or in future 
lives 

katar (H) Indian thrusting dagger with a 
double-edged blade and a transverse grip 
between two parallel bars 

kathakali (H) masked dance drama of South 
India, especially Kerala 

khalifa (A) caliph, successor, either to a ruler 
or to a mystical leader 

khanjar (A) curved dagger; the Indian type 
has a double-edged, sometimes double- 
curved blade and often a pistol-grip handle 

khas mahal (P, lit. "special place") private 
apartments of a prince or ruler 

kirttimukha (S, lit. "face of glory") lion- 
like mask that is a potent symbol of Shiva 

koftgari (P, from kuftan, "to beat") metal- 
work technique in which gold and silver 
arc hammered into an engraved steel 
surface 



Krishna (S, lit. "dark") hero of ancient leg- 
end revered as the eighth avatar of Vishnu. 
Perhaps the most popular Hindu deity, 
Krishna is the object of a cult associated 
with the bhakti (devotional) movement in 
northern India; called the Blue God, he is 
worshiped in many forms, as an infant, 
as Gopala (the Cowherd), as the Divine 
Lover, as Bhagata (the Adorable One) 

Kufic (A) angular style of Arabic writing 
used in early Qur'ans and in pre-1250 
epigraphy 

kurta (H) overshirt, tunic 

Lakshmi (S, lit. "sign" or "token") god- 
dess of fortune, the consort of Vishnu 

lingam (S, lit. "mark" or "characteristic") 
phallic symbol of energy and fertility and 
of the god Shiva 

lota (H) water vessel 

madrasa (A, lit. "place of learning") Muslim 
theological college 

Mahadeva (S) the Great God, epithet of 
Shiva, sometimes also applied to Vishnu 

maharaja (H) great king or great prince, 
title of the most powerful Hindu rulers of 
the Indian princely states 

mahout (H) elephant driver 

makara (H) mythical aquatic animal, a kind 
of crocodile, which has magical and oc- 
cult powers, usually related to the fertil- 
ity of rivers, lakes, and the sea; the makara 
is the vehicle of Varuna, god of the wa- 
ters of heaven and earth, and of Ganga, 
goddess of the Ganges, and it is the em- 
blem of Kama, the god of love 

mandala (S, lit. "circle") circular diagram of 
religious symbols used for meditative pur- 
poses by both Hindus and Buddhists; the 
Hindu temple seen from above represents 
a mandala 

mansab (A) rank of an officer, usually in 
the Mughal army 

mansabdar (A/P) someone who holds the 
rank of mansab 

mantra (S) sacred word or formula carrying 
spiritual power 

mardana (P) men's quarters 

masjid (A, lit. "place for prostration") 
mosque 

maya (S) illusion; in Hindu and Buddhist 
philosophy, the phenomenal world is but 
an illusory play 

mihrab (A) prayer niche, placed so as to 
indicate the direction of Mecca; metaphor- 
ically, the place to which one turns in 
devotion 

mirza (P) title of honor given to royal 
princes as well as to high officials, schol- 
ars, and noblemen 

morchhal (H) peacock-feather fly whisk or 
fan 



459 



mudra (S) in Hinduism, Jainism, and Bud- 
dhism, hand gesture expressing a symbolic 
meaning 

Muhaqqaq (A) decorative cursive Arabic 
script with very high verticals 

muraqqa c (A, lit. "patchwork") album with 
pictures 

muraqqaha-i latif ma c i taswirha (A/P) 
charming albums with pictures 

musha c ira (A) contest of poets reciting their 
own verse, usually in Persian or Urdu 

naga (S) serpent, snake spirit 

Nandi (S) the Happy One, the bull that is 
the vehicle of Shiva 

Naskhi (A) simple cursive Arabic script 

Nastaliq (P) "hanging" style of Arabic let- 
tering used predominantly for writing 
Persian, characterized by strong movement 
from upper left to lower right 

Nauratan (H, lit. "nine jewels") the nine 
specially selected members of Akbar's 
entourage 

nawab (P/A, from na 3 ib, "viceroy") high- 
ranking official, often a governor or prince 
(origin of the English word nabob) 

nayaka, nayika (H) male, female lover in 
classical Indian poetry 

padma (S) lotus 

paijama (P, lit. "foot dress") long, loose 
trousers, usually of thin material 

pan (H) areca nut, lime, and other ingredi- 
ents rolled in a betel leaf and chewed 

pandan (H) box in which pan ingredients 
are kept 

parda (P, lit. "curtain") veiling of women 
and, by extension, their confinement in 
their homes 

pashmina (P) fine Kashmiri wool used for 
weaving shawls 

patka (H) sash worn by the nobility 

pechhavai (H) hanging for a shrine or tem- 
ple of Vishnu, usually depicting scenes 
from the life of Krishna and symbols as- 
sociated with his worship 

peshwa (P/H) prime minister, especially 
among the Marathas 

pousta (H) opium concoction, which is le- 
thal in large doses 

pranayama (S) breath control, practiced by 
yogis and also by Muslim mystics 

puja (S) Hindu ritual of worship, homage 

punkah (H) fan; formerly, a piece of cloth 
fastened at a door, sometimes sprinkled 
with water, which a servant pulled to and 
fro with a string to produce a soft, cool- 
ing breeze 

qalam (A) reed pen used for writing Arabic 
characters 

qalamdan (A/P) box for writing utensils 



Qur'an (A, lit. "recitation") the scripture 
of Islam; according to Muslim dogma the 
114 chapters of the Qur'an contain God's 
word as proclaimed through the Prophet 
Muhammad 

Radha (S) the most beautiful of the gopis 
(herdswomen) of Vrindavan, mistress of 
Krishna 

raga, ragini (S, from ranj, "to color" or 
"to tinge with emotion") fundamental mu- 
sical modes on which classical Indian 
music is improvised, conceived as mas- 
culine and feminine and connected with 
special times and moods 

ragamala (H, lit. "garland of melody") se- 
quence of musical modes illustrated ac- 
cording to special iconographic traditions 

rahl (A) Qur'an stand 

raja (H, from S, rajan) king, prince 

rakshasa (S) demon who wanders in the 
night and can assume many animal and 
human forms 

Rama (S) seventh incarnation of Vishnu and 
legendary hero of the great Hindu epic 
the Ramayana 

Ramadan (A) ninth month of the Muslim 
lunar year, devoted to complete fasting 
(neither food, drink, injections, nor even 
the smelling of fragrance is permitted from 
dawn to sunset); the feast celebrating the 
end of the fast is a joyous occasion 

rana (H) Hindu prince, ruler 

rani (H) Hindu princess or lady of high rank 

rao (H) king, prince, or chief; a Hindu title 
of honor 

rasa (S) flavor, sentiment; also sap, juice, 
essence 

Rihani (A) small, decorative Arabic script 
with short endings 

rishi (S) seer, sage 

rumal (P, lit. "kerchief to wipe the face") 
square cloth, often embroidered, used as 
a handkerchief, towel, or covering 

sadhu (S) Hindu ascetic 

safina (A, lit. "boat") small notebook, usu- 
ally for Persian poetry, that is sewn at its 
narrower end 

sarpech (P/H) turban ornament; the lower 
part is the arpati, the upper front the jigha 

sati (S) self-immolation of a Hindu widow 
on her husband's funeral pyre 

Shab-i Barat (P/A) night of the full moon 
of the eighth lunar month, Sha c ban, 
when it is said the fates of mankind are 
written in heaven for the coming year; 
Muslims celebrate Shab-i Barat with fire- 
works and the preparation of special sweets 

shah tus (P, lit. "king's fleece") fleece left 
on bushes wild mountain goats have 
passed, the wool the finest Kashmiri 
shawls are made from 



shaikh (A, lit. "old man") honorific name 
for the elder in a community, specifically 
a master of the mystical path 

Shaivite worshiper of Shiva 

shakti (S) divine power as embodied in the 
female, especially connected with Shiva's 
female counterpart 

shamsa (A, lit. "little sun") rosette 

Shi c a or Shi'ite (A, from shi c a, "sect") 
Muslim faction that holds that Muham- 
mad's cousin and son-in-law c Ali should 
have been the Prophet's first successor. 
The Shi c a developed the concept of the 
infallible imam (leader), descendant of 
c Ali and his wife Fatima, Muhammad's 
daughter 

Shikasta (P) "broken" style of Persian cal- 
ligraphy developed during the seventeenth 
century, often quite illegible 

shish mahal (P, lit. "place of mirrors") hall 
covered with numerous tiny mirrors that 
reflect the light 

Shiva (S, lit. "auspicious") third deity of 
the Hindu trinity, great ascetic who is both 
creative (symbolized by the lingam) and 
destructive (as Bhairava, the Terrible); 
Shiva is often represented as Nataraja, 
Lord of the Dance, whose powerful, ec- 
static dance is symbolic of the continuous 
cycle of creation and destruction of the 
universe 

simurgh (P) fabulous mythical bird whose 
colorful feather helps fulfill wishes; in mys- 
tical Islamic literature, the simurgh be- 
comes the symbol of the divine 

Sita (S, lit. "furrow") goddess of agricul- 
ture, Rama's wife and heroine of the 
Ramayana, in which she is abducted by 
Ravana, demon king of Lanka 

Sufi (A, from suf, "wool") Muslim ascetic 
and mystic; Sufi fraternities, which devel- 
oped in the twelfth century, were instru- 
mental in carrying the teachings of the 
Prophet into the many borderlands of 
Islam, including India 

Sugriva (S, lit. "he who has a beautiful 
neck") king of the monkeys, Rama's ally 

Takht-i ta 3 us (P) the Peacock Throne, com- 
missioned by Shah Jahan 

talwar (P) sword with a long, curved blade 

tanpura (P) stringed instrument used to pro- 
vide a drone in Indian music 

thakur (H) lord, master, or person of rank 
or authority 

Thugs (H, from thag, "thief") religious fra- 
ternity of professional assassins who until 
they were suppressed in the nineteenth cen- 
tury prevailed in parts of Central and 
North India; they garroted their victims 
and offered them up to the goddess Bha- 
vani (a form of the Devi) 

Thuluth (A) monumental Arabic script 
often used in epigraphy 



460 



tikka or tilaka (H) mark of blessing or caste 
made on the forehead 

tirthankara (S) one of the twenty-four saints 
whose teachings are the basis of the Jain 
religion 

toran (S) gate or archway at a temple or 
stupa 

tughra (T) especially in India, any artificially 
contrived form of Arabic writing, such 
as mirrored sentences, fenceworklike writ- 
ing, or birds or beasts composed of mean- 
ingful words (a tughra was originally the 
handsign of a ruler at the beginning of a 
document, and later the word referred to 
a calligraphic emblem) 

c urs (A, lit. "wedding") anniversary of the 
death of a Muslim saint, commemorat- 
ing the union of his soul with God; the 
c urs of a great Sufi attracts thousands of 
visitors, who enjoy communal prayer 
and music, as well as less spiritual enter- 
tainment 

ustad (P) master of any craft 

vahana (S) vehicle or mount of a deity 

Vaishnavite worshiper of Vishnu 

vina (S) ancient Indian musical instrument 
with one or more strings, a kind of lute 

Vishnu (S, lit. "pervader") second deity of 
the Hindu trinity, the preserver of the uni- 
verse who embodies mercy and goodness; 
to save mankind from suffering, Vishnu 
descended to earth in several incarnations; 
his first avatar was a fish (Matsya); the 
most well known of his avatars are the 
heroes Rama and Krishna 

Yama (S) King of the Dead, in Hindu my- 
thology the god who conducts the dead 
to the realm of the ancestors 

yogi (S) Hindu ascetic; literally someone 
who practices yoga 

yugas (S) the four ages or periods of the ex- 
istence of the world, which total 4,320,000 
years: krita- or satya-yuga (the "golden 
age"), treta-yuga, dvapara-yuga, and kali- 
yuga, the present "black age," the short- 
est of the four, after which the world will 
be destroyed, to be re-created in a new, 
similarly arranged system 

zenana (P) women's quarters 








